The Chronicle Business Reporter
STANBIC Bank has donated sun protection products worth US$34 000 to the Albino Charity Organisation of Zimbabwe (ALCOZ) as part of its annual corporate social investment (CSI) contribution. The consignment includes 1 000 units of sunscreen lotions, 1 000 units of antibacterial soap, 1 000 units of antiseptic liquid, 1 000 units of lip balm and 1 000 sunhats as well as spectacles for 12 beneficiaries. The donation is aimed at improving the welfare of people living with albinism and marks the fifth consecutive year that Stanbic Bank has assisted ALCOZ as it continues to play its part in cushioning people living with albinism against weather elements, particularly the sun. Stanbic Bank head of marketing and communications, Mr Palmer Mugavha, said the plight of people living with albinism is often taken for granted as most people are yet to fully appreciate the consequences of exposing their skin to the sun and other challenges they face. “As Stanbic Bank we fully appreciate the vulnerability of people living with albinism as well as the economic and social challenges some face daily. The bank is all too aware that some are ostracised and stigmatised over and above the fact that the sun protection products are priced well beyond the reach of many,” said Mr Mugavha. Albinism is a rare, non-contagious, genetically inherited condition, which occurs worldwide regardless of ethnicity or gender. It commonly results in the lack of melanin in the hair, skin, and eyes, causing vulnerability to sun exposure. Mr Mugavha said while the donation was now a fixed calendar for the bank, this year’s contribution was more essential as it comes against a background of Covid-19, which has worsened an already challenging economic situation. “The prevailing economic environment coupled with the menacing Covid-19 pandemic, which has eroded people’s income and revenue streams has moved Stanbic Bank to stand in that financial gap and support ALCOZ and its members.” People living with albinism need protection from the harmful effects of the sun owing to the lack of melanin in their skin which serves as a shield from the sun. They rely on sunscreens lotions, special oils and lip balm for protection from the sun. Last year Stanbic partnered Zimplats to work with the mining company’s “Beyond the Skin” initiative and purchased spectacles for individuals and groups identified by Zimplats. Beyond the Skin’s focus is supporting people living with albinism. The partnership saw 27 people living with albinism from Binga, Hwange and Lupane districts in Matabeleland North Province receiving spectacles and sunscreen lotions.
ALCOZ founder and director, Mrs Loveness Mainato, welcomed the donations saying Stanbic Bank was proving to be an “all-weather friend” especially during this Covid-19 pandemic era.