The Chronicle Midlands Bureau
GOVERNMENT has commended Redcliff-based, ZimChem Refineries (Pvt) Limited, for its robust response in the fight against Covid-19 and efforts to create more jobs through its second plant upgrade. ZimChem, which specialises in timber processing chemicals and tar for road making, in a response to the global pandemic, has so far produced 30 000 litres of sanitisers. The company’s strides were discussed during last week’s Cabinet meeting. ZimChem is set to employ 80 more people when it completes its plant refurbishment that is currently ongoing and the Government is in total support of the programme. ZimChem acting managing director, Mr Tendai Shoko, told Business Chronicle the company would continue to scale up operations and expressed excitement over the company’s recognition by the Government. “Our sanitiser production was scaled up after the outbreak of Covid-19 in support of Government initiatives to fight the pandemic. We have since ventured full time into production of sanitisers and disinfections for ablution facilities in schools, hospitals, clinics and other public places,” he said in an interview. Although the company is yet to secure required funding for the expansion projects, Mr Shoko said they were working on building stronger ties with key local material suppliers. The company requires US$3 million for the refurbishment of the plant and purchase of raw material. “We are yet to secure the needed funding but we are strengthening ties with local suppliers in order to provide home grown solutions to the timber treatment industry, which is currently wholly importing chemicals from South Africa,” he said. “We look forward to contributing to the economy through import substitution in these areas.” The timber treatment sector alone is estimated to be spending US$2 million importing timber treatment chemicals annually while the road construction sector is spending much more importing priming chemicals, which can be sourced locally if the company is properly funded. Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister, Senator Monica Mutsvangwa said the company, which is located within the Ziscosteel plant, had done a commendable job in the fight against the global pandemic. “Industry and Commerce Minister (Dr Sekai Nzenza) informed Cabinet that the ZimChem company in Kwekwe made a robust response to the Covid-19 outbreak by diversifying its product range to the production of dishwashers and sanitisers at affordable prices,” she said.