The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Do friends of the deceased owe anyone anything? — is the question that played out during the funeral wake, burial and after tears of flamboyant businessman, Genius “Ginimbi” Kadungure. He was buried at his Domboshava home last Saturday after he died from a car accident in Harare on 8 November. Ginimbi was a larger than life character, a social media influencer and entertainer, whose tagline “My life, your Tv” epitomised how he kept people glued to his lifestyle. He had a massive mansion, the latest cars and lots of them and basically lived a champagne life. He had the crew to back him up in the form of DJ Rimo Jackson, Boss Tumelo, Albert Ndabambi, Uncle Rolen, Kit Kat, Tazvi “Chief J” Mhaka, Pokello Nare and many others who seemed to be in the same social and financial spheres. Kadungure died on the spot when his Rolls Royce Wraith was involved in a head-on-collision and burst into flames. What then followed was an action-packed series funeral wake. Three of his friends, Limumba Karim from Malawi and a Mozambican, who was only identified as Elisha and birthday girl, Mitchelle “Moana” Amuli who were travelling in the same car with Ginimbi, were burnt beyond recognition. One of the highlights of the funeral wake was one man who complained that Ginimbi’s friends had abandoned him following his death. In a video that went viral, the man said Ginimbi’s friends were heartless as they failed to sleep at the funeral wake as per tradition and provide breakfast. He went on to say that Ginimbi would buy people alcohol until 5AM, but his friends failed to buy breakfast (milk and eggs) even suggesting that they should have bought takeaways for people who were digging Ginimbi’s grave. Many people said they expected Ginimbi’s many friends to come to the party interms of financing the funeral. But is this the case, are friends of the deceased supposed to shoulder the burden of his or her funeral expenses? Do people attend or help out at a funeral out of the goodness of their hearts or they want to make a quick buck for say digging graves and other such chores? Ginimbi’s brother, Darlington said it was saddening how people were ignoring the fact that the person who had the money died and therefore expecting too much from people who did not have the said money. It is wrong for people to expect Ginimbi’s friends to be as benevolent as he was because they might not have as much as he had.