The Chronicle Gibson Mhaka, Senior Reporter
CHURCHES should play a leading role in complementing Government efforts to assist the vulnerable who have been adversely affected by the Covid-19 pandemic, Zanu-PF Politburo member and principal of The Herbert Chitepo School of Ideology, Cde Munyaradzi Machacha, has said. Cde Machacha said churches should do more to assist especially the vulnerable who are the worst affected by the pandemic which has disrupted economic activities. Speaking during a donation of food hampers to children of war veterans in Bulawayo by Johane Masowe weChishanu leader Madzibaba Emmanuel Mutumwa at his church shrine in Selbourne Park on Sunday, Cde Machacha said the church’s gesture was commendable and urged other churches to come on board. “This is the first church to donate to children of war veterans as a way of appreciating the good work done by their parents who fought gallantly to liberate the country. I want to thank Madzibaba Mutumwa and also urge other churches to also complement Government efforts to assist the under privileged especially during this Covid-19 pandemic,” said Cde Machacha. Madzibaba Mutumwa’s church donated food hampers comprising a 10kg bag of mealie-meal, 2kg sugar and 2 litres cooking oil to 315 children of war veterans in Bulawayo. Cde Machacha also urged churches to pray for peace and the country’s leadership saying that was one of the ways that development can take place. “It is also the role of the church to pray for peace because the country can only develop when there is peace and tranquillity. Churches should preach peaceful co-existence while at the same time extending their hands to the needy and poor,” said Cde Machacha while adding that Zanu-PF and the church’s relationship dates back to the days of liberation struggle. Madzibaba Mutumwa who sourced the food hampers with the help of Blue Investments director Mr Tafadzwa Tavengwa said the gesture was in response to the request for help from the chairman of the Bulawayo chapter of children of war veterans Mr Gift Muhomba. “We are making this donation in response to request for assistance from children of war veterans who said they were facing challenges as a result of the Covid-19 economic disruptions. These children’s parents sacrificed their lives to liberate this country and we also have an obligation to assist them especially during this pandemic,” said Madzibaba Mutumwa. He appealed to Government to ensure that indigenous churches also benefit from Government projects in farming and mining. The ceremony was attended by Zanu-PF Bulawayo Province interim chairperson Cde Obert Msindo, secretary for administration Raymond Mtomba, central committee member Emmanuel Kanjomo, ward 28 councillor Kidwell Mujuru and other party members.