The Chronicle Sports Reporter
BULAWAYO’S representatives at the elite cricket club competition, National Premier League (NPL) had a disappointing campaign, with Queens Sports Club finishing second from the bottom of the nine-team log, while Amakhosi ended on position seven. Harare’s Takashinga were crowned NPL champions, finishing the inaugural season of the elite club competition equal on points with MidWest, but claimed the title thanks to their superior head-to-head record. Both sides won six times and each recorded two losses during the competition, leaving the result of their meeting as the decisive factor for the championship. Takashinga also had a better net run rate of +1.502, compared to MidWest’s plus +0.698. While Takashinga were revelling after winning the title which has US$10 000 prize, Amakhosi suffered an eight runs loss to Gladiators. It was a perfect ending for Gladiators who started the competition with four successive defeats before winning their last four rounds of games. Amakhosi had done well to take out Gladiators with 81 runs after 27.2 overs, only for the Bulawayo side to crumble being bowled all out with 73 runs after 20 overs. The left-arm spinner Malcom Chikuwa was the match-winner in a remarkable victory for Gladiators over Amakhosi at Kwekwe Sports Club. After Gladiators had collapsed for a meagre total of 81, Chikuwa came good with the ball and skittled out Amakhosi for 73, taking seven wickets himself for only 16 runs. The only time the bat ever looked to master the ball in this match was when Saleem Nihute (12) and Tony Munyonga (14) were putting on 35 for Gladiators’ second wicket in the morning. Steve Chimhamhiwa dismissed them both, while the main damage was done by another left-arm spinner, Ainsley Ndlovu, who whipped out five batsmen for only 11 runs. Amakhosi made a disastrous start as they chased their small target, losing three wickets for 10 runs before their opener, Nkosana Mpofu, still there, found good defensive support for a while from Allan Chigoma before the latter was out for four at a total of 35. But Mpofu went for 18 with the score 42, and the middle order fell to pieces against Chikuwa. Eight men were out for 51, but Gladiators were not safe yet, as there were brief rallies from John Nyumbu (9) and Steve Chimhamhiwa (13 not out), before the last wicket went down for 73, leaving Gladiators unexpected victors. Queens, led by Christopher Mpofu lost to Harare Kings by four wickets.