The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
EVERY Zimbabwean artiste worth their salt once performed at the Underground Hillbrow Theatre in South Africa.
Nestled in Hillbrow, Johannesburg where most Zimbabweans in the neighbouring country live, work and hustle, Underground Hillbrow Theatre has presented many local artistes with a platform of expression, creativity and stardom. When one wants to have a feel of music by Zimbabweans, the Hillbrow theatre is definitely the best place to patronise as they are guaranteed of diverse musical performances from Maskandi, Sungura, Marabi, Amapiano, Alternative genre and all creativity in between. Because of this background, performing in the 1 200 seater auditorium has become most artistes’ dream. Equipped with a recording studio, the theatre which was refurbished recently, is becoming a one-stop hub and most now call the venue The Theatre of Dreams. Entertainers who performed at the venue this year include Martin and Ndolwane Super Sounds and Zinjaziyamluma.
A lot of young artistes from Plumtree, Tshololotsho, Nkayi and Lupane also graced the stage and got the much-needed exposure. Saturday Leisure caught up with the man who is behind the hosting of most shows at the venue, promoter Phakama “PK” Ndlovu who is managing the joint. “I started running and managing the Hillbrow Theatre in June, 2019. The name was changed during that transition to Underground Hillbrow Theatre as Underground Entertainment is the one which is managing the venue now. “The plan was simple. We wanted to make Hillbrow Theatre greater as an arts hub. During the Covid-19 lockdown, we managed to do few events, among them Martin of Ndolwane Super Sounds birthday celebrations as well as Insimbi Zezhwane and Mxolisi Mr Bones album launches,” said PK. As an arts promoter, PK who has hosted the likes of Alick Macheso and Jah Prayzah in the neighbouring country said the theatre is all about unearthing talent with a bias towards Zimbabwean musicians. “We host different kinds of events from music to theatre productions. The building is also famous for theatre productions, both international and local,” he said. PK called on local artistes in South Africa not to hesitate to go to the venue to showcase their works on an international stage. “Very few see the importance of that venue yet it belongs to them. I guess it’s normal that one only realises what he/she had when it’s gone as only a few seem to appreciate and take advantage of the venue. “In the long run though, our plan is to make Underground Hillbrow Theatre a one-stop entertainment hub. We’ve introduced a music recording studio and I’m busy trying to put a film studio. We also manage artistes in-house and do events management.” Artistes managed under the Underground stable include Prosper Bafana, Lupane Big Shows, Allen Ndoda, Bhud Fa the Comedian, Major Natives, Piano Brothers and Eswatini’s Proud Swazi. PK added that as the new normal has caused a decline of live events, they are going to spruce up the digitisation of theatre so that people are able to watch form the comfort of their homes. — @mthabisi_mthire.