The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
THE Warriors will start their back to back encounters against the Desert Foxes on the back foot, with analysts pointing to poor preparations, a new coach and an unprepared squad as reasons why they might come up short against their fancied North African opponents. The Warriors square off with the Desert Foxes in Algiers tonight before the two teams collide again at the National Sports Stadium next Monday. Algeria are unbeaten in their last 20 games in all competitions in a period stretching two years. Their last home match, in an AFCON qualifier was a five-goal destruction of Chipolopolo in Algeria. Ahead of the first encounter, warriors coach, Zdravko Logarusic has expressed concern about a lack of game time for crucial players at their respective clubs. To add to that the Croat has had little or no time to impose his philosophy and playing style on the team. Football analyst Sakheleni Nxumalo says the Warriors will have the going tough against the Desert Foxes. “We are in a tricky situation because not only were our preparations not ideal but there is a new coach in charge of the Warriors and quite a number of new recruits. “In football there has got to be a method to your madness and this could be our undoing because the new coach has not had time to implement his philosophy. “Let me give you an example of what I am talking about. “At club level Jordan Zemura may be playing in a system that shows the winger outside and denying him an opportunity to cross as a way of neutralising his threat while coach Zdravko Logarusic may be an advocate of a system that encourages guiding the winger inside where the defender has the support of the midfielders. “Due to the limited time the new coach has had to work with his players such issues may not have been clarified at training and it could create problems so for the first match it could be a wise move to field players that have played together in the past,” said Nxumalo. Renowned sportscaster Muziwethu Hadebe says a draw for the Warriors will be a positive result. “I think it’s going to be a difficult match for us. Algeria has players plying their trade in Europe and have been active and by contrast our squad has a mixture in terms of players who have been really active. It will seem half of our squad has been inactive. “However, if we put out heads together, we can still surprise Algeria. A lot will depend on who we use upfront and if they will get the necessary supply as I believe Tino Kadewere and Prince Dube are in top form but the coaches might still prefer to throw in David Moyo who would want to surprise the nation. The best we can get in my view will be a point,” said Hadebe The Warriors coach has seen four of the players he had called up not available for various reasons. Marshal Munetsi, Butholezwe Ncube, Tatenda Mukuruva and Tendai Jirira are the players who pulled out of the squad. Former Dynamos defender, Victor Kamhuka has been called up for the trip to Algeria.
— @innocentskizoe