The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
THE US$2,5 million investment in Makhado area along Bulawayo-Beitbridge Highway is proof that private public partnerships (PPPs) are a viable economic model to drive robust development that transforms local communities. The new One-Stop Shop Makhado Business Complex was officially opened on Friday. It has a 28-room lodge, beauty salon, service station, Internet café, motor vehicle workshops, conference facilities, butchery, bakery, supermarket, and a hardware shop, among other key services. The project was built by TopPick Investment, a company owned by the Marema Family, which is based in South Africa. The Minister of State for Provincial Affairs and Devolution, Abednico Ncube, who witnessed the opening event said more economic opportunities could be unlocked if private sector players joined hands with the Government to drive investment. Matabeleland South has rich mineral resources and is also favourable to farming, tourism and energy development, which presents huge investor opportunities. “As Matabeleland South, we are fully behind the Government’s vision to turn the country into an upper middle-income economy as clearly articulated by President Mnangagwa,” he said. “This calls for the collaboration between the Government and the private sector in building the economy. It is pleasing to note that TopPick Investment is one of the companies that headed the Presidential call to invest in Zimbabwe.” Minister Ncube said the project will not only change the landscape of the Makhado area but also bring the much-needed services along the Beitbridge-Bulawayo Highway, which is a very critical and busy road in the province. The minister said TopPick Investment had invested a lot in the province in areas including funeral parlours, farming, accommodation and fuel service while contributing to employment creation, which is one of the Government’s top priorities. “The Makhado complex and lodge will indeed transform our tourism sector, which has been hampered by the lack of the requisite accommodation,” he said. “Matabeleland South has huge tourism potential that remains untapped due to the lack of appropriate infrastructure, such as roads, connectivity and accommodation facilities. “It is my hope that this development can be replicated in other districts.” TopPick Investment, chief executive officer, Mr Danisa Moyo, said the new lodge and business complex was strategically positioned along the highway and the heart of tourism activities in Gwanda and Beitbridge districts. — @tupeyo