The Chronicle Business Reporter
HOSPITALITY group, Cresta Churchill Hotels, says it has completed the refurbishment of its facilities and would leverage on digital technologies to widen the market. Despite the Covid-19 pandemic setback, which forced most hospitality players to close shop in past months, Cresta says it is back on business and is angling for the growing interest in domestic travel and outdoor services.
On Friday Cresta hosted a customer and stakeholders’ cocktail event in Bulawayo where it expressed optimism about the business. “The hotel recently completed its extreme refurbishment exercise, which included revamping of all the guest rooms, conference rooms, reception area, restaurant and bar and public areas,” said Bulawayo branch general manager, Mr Kudzai Ratisai. “The pandemic has brought about an increase in interests in domestic travel, where most people use our facilities due to our proximity to Matopos and as a stopover when travelling to Victoria Falls.” Cresta Hotels is one of Southern Africa`s largest hotel groups, boasting of 17 properties in Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Zimbabwe has five units namely Cresta Sprayview in Victoria Falls, Cresta Jameson, Cresta Oasis, Cresta Lodge, which are in Harare and Cresta Churchill in Bulawayo. Located in the tree-lined streets of Bulawayo, the 50-bedroom Bulawayo hotel facility has two conference rooms, a restaurant and two bars. Mr Ratisai said the hotel has embraced high standards of hygiene due to the Covid-19 pandemic. He said their staff were trained and regularly tested for Covid-19 as part of strict measures put in place to ensure the control of the spread of the virus within the hotel premises. “We are excited to be expanding the brand through more product offerings. We are expanding our catering services into outside catering,” said Mr Ratisai. “As we go into 2021, we will take full advantage of modern technologies such as digital marketing to sell the hotel guest experience to keep travellers engaged.” 