The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Acting Sports Editor
THE inaugural Global esports games will be held in December next year and thereafter will become an annual event and will feature a multi title esports competition, the Global Esports Federation Board has announced. The Games serve as a platform to showcase the world’s best athletes, players, industry partners, brands, innovations and the responsible use of technology in esports, said Chris Chan, president of the Global Esports Federation. “In parallel, the GEF will stage GEFcon — a multi-platform conferencing showcase for dialogue on responsible gaming, technological advancement and shared learning — bringing people together for the celebration of esports,” he said. The GEF has received an unprecedented response following its global call for expressions of interest to host the Global Esports Games. Member Federations from 20 countries attended an applicant briefing session on Friday, which was led by GEF board member, Lorenzo Giorgetti, as Chair of the GEF Selection Committee and the briefing provided the applicants with detailed information on the opportunities, requirements and the selection process. The Board of the GEF has confirmed that a Co-ordination Commission will be established to oversee the planning, preparation and staging of the Global Esports Games. Four-time Olympian and acclaimed global business and sports leader, Angela Ruggiero (USA), will head the Commission together with senior advisor to the GEF Board and vice-president of the Olympic Council of Asia, Luzeng Song (China), as Co-chairs of the Commission. The experienced duo will lead a team of members of the GEF Board, experts and advisors, adding their distinguished leadership experience to the planning, preparation and staging of the GEG. “I look forward to ensuring that esports athletes have the optimal conditions to shine. I am particularly interested in the vast potential and diverse opportunities esports can offer the world. “I believe esports is delivering in new ways, leveraging on technology that can appeal to younger audiences and fans across the world. The Global Esports Games will be an exciting new frontier for the convergence of esports and traditional sports,” said Ruggiero. As esports continues to advance on the global stage, the Global Esports Games is positioned to reset the bar and offer a new level for athletes and players and the entire esports community. Song Luzeng brings with him close to 40 years of experience in the Olympic movement and will contribute to the complex task of overseeing the successful preparations and staging of the Global Esports Games. The Global Esports Games is an unprecedented multi-title esports event of a global scale to combine the gaming, performance, education, and business aspects of esports onto one international stage. The GEG paves the way for the future of esports — convening some of the best-known names in esports globally, elevating the credibility, legitimacy and prestige of esports.