The Chronicle Dr Tatenda Simango I HOPE you are well and in good health as your read this. With Covid-19 cases on the rise, this is a good time to remind one another of the prevention protocols for the pandemic; remember to mask up, wash your hands and maintain physical distancing. Bulawayo has, unfortunately been beset by increasing diarrhoea cases and to help in the prevention of these, particular care should be given to drinking water. If taken straight from the tap, drinking water may cause vomiting and watery stool. To avoid this, it can be boiled or treated with chlorine. Now, November, as many of you will know, is referred to as ‘‘Movember’’. The month is marked by men growing their moustaches and beards to raise awareness on prostate and testicular cancer; and men’s mental health. Now, in week three, let’s take a closer look at testicular cancer. Fortunately, testicular cancer is not a common cancer, and when it does occur it can be picked up at early stages and cured. The testicles are the two oval-shaped male organs that sit inside the scrotum on either side of the penis. They are an important part of the male reproductive system because they produce sperm and the hormone testosterone, which plays a major role in male sexual development. Factors that may increase your risk of testicular cancer include: Symptoms of testicular cancer may include: Having understood its symptoms it is important to bear in mind that testicular cancer is highly treatable, even when cancer has spread beyond the testicle; however, there’s no way to prevent it. The most common type of testicular cancer is germ cell testicular cancer, which accounts for around 95 percent of all cases. Germ cells are a type of cell that the body uses to create sperm; and there are two main types of germ cell, namely: Both types tend to respond well to chemotherapy. You can have an artificial (prosthetic) testicle inserted into your scrotum so the appearance of your testicles is not greatly affected.Having both testicles removed will definitely stop you from producing testosterone. Testosterone replacement therapy is where you’re given testosterone in the form of an injection, skin patch or gel to rub into your skin. If you have injections, you’ll usually need to have them every two to three months. After having testosterone replacement therapy, you’ll be able to maintain an erection and your sex drive will improve. You may be able to bank your sperm before having a bilateral orchidectomy to allow you to father children if you decide to. ’Till next week, stay well and in good health.