The Chronicle Davies Ndumiso Sibanda, Labour matters
MANY works councils are not adding the value they should be giving to organisations because all the players are not clear on how this structure can be utilised in the interest of the business and workers. Many organisations run works councils with untrained managers and workers who are not clear on the role of the works council in the workplace. Many managers think the works council is a forum for attending to workers’ grievances and to deal with workers’ demands for higher wages on the other hand, workers think it’s a forum for making demands against the employer. Organisations that are getting the best value from the works council use it as a forum for exchange of information and ideas and allowing for improvement of relations between employer and employees. The works council meeting gives the workers a window to better understand the organisation’s strategic direction thus workers are able to work to support the strategic plan and direction. The Labour Act Chapter 28:01 in section 25A has a list of areas of focus by the employer and workers at works council but unfortunately many employers and workers committee members do not read and follow the provisions of the Act. Key among issues to be discussed at works council is utilisation of human capital, use of equipment and other resources so that maximum productivity is achieved. The Act sees the works council as a forum where measures to encourage and maintain good labour relations are put in place. Contrary to the thinking of some managers and workers leaders that see the works council as a battleground for the soul of the organisation. Issues of employee safety and health are discussed and attended to at works council and above all the Act gives the works council the duty to attend to the welfare of both employee and the business. It is the welfare of the business that is overlooked by parties and the Act does not explain what it means. In my reading of the Act welfare of the business means that both employer and employees have a duty to ensure the business runs smoothly and continues to grow. While management has a duty to provide strategic direction, workers have a duty to work towards the strategic goals. To assist the organisation utilise the works council the parties have to ensure the works council constitution is in place to guide parties on the conduct of meetings and works council business. Parties to the works council have also to realise that the works council has power to make laws that bind the work place in the form of collective bargaining works council agreements. These agreements become law of the workplace and bind present and future employees depending on the lifespan of the agreements. Matters of discipline and retrenchment are driven through the works council. The works council has the power to negotiate and register a code of conduct that becomes binding to all employees in the organisation. This clearly shows the power vested on the works council. In instances where the employer wants to retrench, he has a duty to notify the works council and negotiate through the works council. In conclusion, the works council is part of the machinery to manage a business and as such it must be understood and its drivers trained on its utilisation. -Davies Ndumiso Sibanda can be contacted on: email: stratwaysmail@yahoo.com