The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
No two ways, the death of popular Harare socialite and businessman, Genius “Ginimbi” Kadungure has affected many. From the feedback on social media, it is like people never expected him to die. His death on Sunday morning following a head-on accident along Borrowdale Road in Harare was sudden and clearly, most did not anticipate it. Ginimbi, 36, is a man who lived his life to the fullest and never had issues with people. He hustled hard and partied hardest, even partying to his death. Just like his name suggests and looking at his business ventures and wealth that he amassed over the years, he was undoubtedly a genius in all that he did. Driving fast luxurious cars, popping champagne in the company of friends and fine women and attracting attention while at it is what he loved the most. Like any person, some loved Ginimbi as he kept them entertained with his crazy posts of his lifestyle on Instagram while others disliked him for his pomposity. When news of his death circulated on social media on Sunday morning, even those who seemed not to like him, shared their condolence messages. From the posts and comments on various social media platforms, people seemed shattered. Interestingly, even some who had never met the guy in real life were affected. “He didn’t deserve to die like this. I’d never met him but the news of his death unsettled me,” wrote one Thembelani Dube on Facebook. “I’ve had to leave Facebook for a while because it’s full of Ginimbi’s accident pictures and saddening posts. I just couldn’t handle it anymore,” said a colleague. So bad is the situation that Power FM radio personality Rumbidzai Chamvary admitted that she had challenges sleeping on Sunday due to the news of Ginimbi’s death. Most who were tuned in to her midday show also called in and shared their similar experiences. “This guy was a free spirit. So seeing him die in such a nature has really gotten most of us worried. Death is real and it’s coming. This has freaked me out,” said one caller. “When I saw videos of Ginimbi’s accident, I was hurt. I was scared to sleep alone yesterday,” said another. Long and short, Ginimbi’s death that came at a time that the nation was still trying to come to terms with the sudden death of another arts personality Cal Vin following a hit and run car accident, was too much for people to handle. However, these deaths have definitely shown people that time on earth is limited hence the need for people to introspect, kiss and make up and love more.