The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Acting Sports Editor
THE World Athletics Awards will be staged as a virtual event on December 5 with eight accolades up for grabs, custodians of the sport at global level have announced. The awards are being virtually held due to the Covid-19 pandemic that has seen many Governments across the world imposing a number of travel restrictions so as to curb the spread of the pandemic. Europe is witnessing a spike in new cases that has forced some countries to re-introduce lockdowns as they battle to contain the virus hence the latest move to stage a virtual event. Monaco, France has been the traditional venue for the awards. In a statement, World Athletics also announced that the event will be streamed live on their YouTube channel. It said this year’s ceremony will recognise exceptional achievement in what has been an extraordinary and unprecedented year, both on and off the fields of play, and celebrate the athletes who met the challenges of 2020 head-on to produce some of the finest performances in the history of the sport. World Athletics president Sebastian Coe said: “In a disruptive year our athletes continued to train hard and our event organisers went above and beyond to deliver four full Diamond League events and four Diamond League exhibition meetings, seven Continental Tour Gold events, a World Half Marathon Championships and a number of innovative virtual events including the Ultimate Garden Clash. “Whilst this was not the year any of us had planned for, I am proud of our athletes, our meeting organisers and the World Athletics team for their tenacity and determination. This is what we will celebrate at this year’s Annual Awards.” Awards that are up for grabs: Male and Female Athlete of the Year
These awards recognise the top-performing athletes of the year. A three-way voting process — split between the World Athletics Council, the World Athletics Family, and the worldwide community of athletics fans — will determine the five men and five women finalists. President’s Award
This award recognises and honours exceptional service to athletics. Coaching Achievement Award
Given to a coach who has helped athletes thrive, particularly in this difficult year. Covid Inspiration Award
This award will recognise an individual or group of individuals whose efforts, despite the challenges of 2020, have resulted in the delivery of a particularly inspiring athletics event or experience. Member Federations Award
Like the Covid Inspiration Award, this honour will recognise a member federation that has managed to deliver an uplifting athletics event, development event or experience in spite of this year’s challenges. Athletes Community Award
A special award from the athletes to a group of individuals who have helped and supported them and their communities throughout trying times. Athletics Photograph of the Year
Awarded to the best athletics photograph of 2020, as decided by an expert panel of judges.