The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
Locals have been urged to enter Africa’s biggest televised talent search, Old Mutual Amazing Voices whose entries close in a week’s time and has another US$100 000 up for grabs. MultiChoice Zimbabwe publicity and public relations manager Liz Dziva said musically-gifted Zimbabweans must not sleep on this once-in-a-lifetime opportunity as it can change their lives. Entries for the competition which is in its second edition opened on October 28 and close on November 26, 2020. The first edition, whose auditions were conducted last year, was held this year. Kenyan RnB group, Wanavokali came out tops and walked away with the US$100 000 prize money. “There’s huge interest among locals who’re keen to win the grand prize of US$100 000. “Musically-inspired groups in Zimbabwe are thus encouraged to continue to enter the competition. “To enter, groups of four, six or eight in genres of gospel, pop or RnB must submit a two-minute audition video before the November 26 deadline,” Dziva said. Those who will be shortlisted, Dziva said, will be invited to attend auditions. The two groups that will be selected to represent the country from the local auditions will go on to compete with other groups from Nigeria, Ghana, Kenya and South Africa at competitions which will take place next year. All stages of the competition will be televised on DStv starting in March next year. “Entrants’ video submissions will be reviewed by a team of experienced in-country talent spotters and the groups selected to go forward to the next round in the competition will be invited to attend closed auditions. Two groups from each country will then be given the opportunity to represent their nation at the elimination phase, held in South Africa,” Dziva said. Leading to the finale, the elimination process will whittle the selection down to three groups in the ultimate sing-off. “General public viewers will be encouraged to vote for their favourite group, helping them get a chance of winning the main prize and the title of Old Mutual Amazing Voices’ season two winners.” Dziva said based on feedback they received from this year’s edition, the next crop of talented contenders are definitely in for a life-changing experience. Last year’s winners, Wanavokali have since returning to Kenya, been working on their debut album. Commenting on the competition, Wanavokali members said: “Apart from being a musical growth experience, Amazing Voices taught us many life skills, including how to manage our finances responsibly in a potentially destructive music business.” Dziva said she hopes local groups will perform well this year and bring the title home. In the first edition, the groups — Rhema, Focus Acapella and Family Voices fared well, although some were below standard. “We’re grateful to Old Mutual for this amazing opportunity and there’s hope that a Zimbabwean group will do well at this year’s competition. Viewers must stand by for series of shows in 2021 that will be enjoyable and exciting.”