The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
FORMER Highlanders and FC Platinum midfielder Welcome Ndiweni says he still has some years in him to compete at the top level. With a combination of skill and pace the attacking midfielder was one of the country’s best prospects at his prime. He has three senior national team caps as well as a number of appearances for the Under-23 to his name. “Waroowa” as he is affectionately known is with Premiership returnees Bulawayo City where he failed to pin a first team jersey last season. Questions have been asked if the midfielder is now past his prime. Now 32, the midfielder however feels he has it in him to play at the top level for the next few years. “I believe l still have some years in me and l can compete at the top. It doesn’t matter the age, it’s all about mentality. I hope to achieve more in football in the next few years. “To be honest at the start of the year l was working really hard, the way l was pushing myself l am certain l was going to have a good season back in the Premier League. “For me personally Covid-19 has been a huge blow but l am glad that we will be returning to training soon. I have not stopped working to be the best that l can,” said Ndiweni. “Waroowa” was introduced to top-flight football by Madinda Ndlovu in 2009. He had cameo roles in the Bosso first team for two seasons before Luke Masomere saw something in him and persuaded the midfielder to join Masvingo United in the 2011 season.He quickly turned into a fan favorite at Masvingo United and in no time FC Platinum were after his signature. It was in the Midlands that he proved his worth. With Masvingo United getting relegated that season, he moved to FC Platinum where he spent two seasons. He had some of his best football moments at Pure Platinum Play including linking up with his friend Joel Ngodzo. “l enjoyed my stay at FC Platinum and really learnt a lot of things at that club. We also played continental football which was just amazing. “Also, playing alongside Josta was great. We have been friends for a longtime and teammates at a number of teams from our days in junior football. “I’m glad that right now he is playing outside the country it has always been a dream for us to make such a break through. “Anything is possible in football maybe l might see myself also attracting interest from a foreign team. l have not lost hope, as l said l believe l will play football for some years from now,” said Ndiweni.