The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
Chronicle reporter Bongani “Inkunzi” Ndlovu was on Saturday night crowned winner in the Roil Bulawayo Arts Awards Outstanding Arts Journalist Across Board. The ceremony which was held at the Large City Hall saw the journalist climb to the stage in an eye-catching suit designed by Welsh the Stylist and tailored by Connie Moyo, of Afro centric feel infused with a vintage touch. The pants and waist coat were made of Ankara material. Welsh the Stylist’s flawless touch was also seen on outfits worn by Outstanding Female Model Ayanda Candice Sibanda and Outstanding Kwaito | House | Gqom Artist | Act Zhezhingtons. Inkunzi prevailed over stiff competition from Sharon Sibindi of Newsday, Langalakhe Mabena of B-Metro and Mthabisi Tshuma of Chronicle. Stories of the comeback of rapper “That Nkayi Girl Awa Khiwe” to a soul stirring obituary about slain Bulawayo rapper Cal Vin and the highly informative build-up to the Roil BAAs 2020 edition are in the impressive repertoire that contributed to Inkunzi clinching his debut Roil BAA gong. Commenting on his win, the multi-award winning journalist thanked his mother for the immense contribution in his journalism career which is about to clock a decade. “I would firstly like to thank my mother uTendai uNakaBongani, for being a constant encouragement to me, every day. I would also want to dedicate this award to my late father uFufu Frank, he will be always missed and would have been proud of me at this moment. “Secondly I would like to thank my colleagues at work. The editor of the Chronicle Lawson Mabhena, Showbiz Editor Melissa Mpofu and my colleagues in the industry, Bruce Ndlovu, Yoliswa Dube, Sindiso Dube, Sharon Sibindi and many others. Thank you for the constant encouragement,” said Inkunzi. He started writing for Zimpapers when he was a student in 2011 before he joined the entertainment desk in 2012 and has never looked back since. “It’s been a journey of everyday learning. I have met the most talented people in the industry who have challenged me and my writing every day. This is my third award adding to the Zim hip-hop 2017 Outstanding Journalist and Skyz Metro FM 2017 Outstanding Music Journalist. “Shout out to Welsh the Stylist who designed my outfit for the awards. He is one of the people whose story should inspire someone as he quit his day job this year. He did so in the middle of Covid-19. Three people including me, whom he dressed won an award,” said Inkunzi. He said the award is an encouragement for him to continue working hard and reporting beyond the entertainment beat. Follow on Twitter @mthabisi_mthire.