The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
STUDENTS who would like to be part of this year’s edition of the Econet Victoria Falls Marathon have been given up to Monday to register for the event free of charge. This year’s event will be held virtually on December 13 with the use of renowned sports tracker SportsSplits. The Bulawayo Athletics Board (Bab) who have worked with Econet over the years have been offered 100 slots for students who wish to be part of the event. Aspiring participants must register through Bab before Monday’s deadline. “We are inviting those from schools both primary and secondary, colleges and universities who are eager to be part of the event to get in touch with Bab so that they are registered for the event for free,” reads a statement from Bab. The popular event, which draws thousands of local and international participants, traditionally takes place during the first week of July, but was postponed to December 13 following national lockdowns across the world as Governments battled to contain the outbreak of the coronavirus. Econet said despite travel restrictions and social distancing measures now observed globally, this year athletes will still be able to participate in the marathon virtually, by simply registering and running the marathon from any country in the world. Four enticing prizes are in store, together with some lucky draws for free race entries for next year’s event and a ‘Virtual Goody Bag’ of discounts are available for all athletes. An eight-night safari is the biggest prize of them all and is open to everyone who enters the race, irrespective of the distance they choose. This safari includes two nights at Victoria Falls Safari Club in Victoria Falls, two nights at the River Club in Zambia, two nights at Serondela Lodge in Namibia and two nights at Chobe Game Lodge in Botswana. Also included are transfers between these luxurious lodges and a dinner on the Bushtracks Express train. As a way of encouraging budding talent, the National Athletics Association of Zimbabwe will award up and coming athletes a donated entry in order for them to compete in the virtual marathon. Those same athletes will also have their entries sponsored to the ‘real’ event in July 2021 as part of a generous donation. By supporting promising athletes in this way, one stands a chance to win a two night at Bayete Collection’s newest lodge, Nkosi Guest Lodge, in Victoria Falls over race weekend, 3 and 4 July 2021 plus a free entry into the event. Everyone running the virtual event stands the chance to win one of the six free entries to the July 2021 event. These will be selected from all social media pictures of athletes competing, dressing up, having fun and simply enjoying the virtual event. Participants have to share the images on the marathon’s social media pages on Facebook and Instagram. — @innocentskizoe