The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
THE Environmental Management Agency (Ema) has a record 30 percent decrease in fire incidences and land destroyed by veld fires in 2020. Four people were however, burnt to death as a result of veld fires this year up from three last year. This is the first time in a decade where less than a million hectares of land were destroyed by veld fires during the fire season. The Covid-19-induced lockdown which restricted outdoor activity contributed to reduction of veld fires. Ema has however, encouraged communities to remain vigilant as the country is still prone to veld fires although the fire season which starts on July 31 and ends on October 31 has ended. In an interview in Binga where Ema was launching its model solar-powered Ema district office, the agency’s environmental education and publicity manager Mrs Amkela Sidange said 1 178 fire incidences were recorded this year, down from 1 508 last year. “A total of 806 457, 84ha of land was lost to veld fires as at 31 October from a total of 1 178 fire incidences recorded since commencement of the statutory fire period on July 31, 2020. Compared to the same period in 2019, a total of 1 508 veld fire incidences destroying 1 158 291,57ha were recorded. This then translates to a decrease of 30,38 percent of total area burnt and 21,38 percent of fire incidents recorded during the 2020 fire season,” said Mrs Sidange. “Apparently this is the first fire season in 10 years where the country has recorded less than 1 million hectares of land lost to veld fires and it is worth noting that the veld fires hotspot province of Mashonaland West recorded a reduction in total area burnt in 2020 compared to previous seasons.” She said Hurungwe in Mashonaland West remains the country’s veld fire hotspot although the province recorded a decrease in incidences. Other hotspot areas are Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, pockets of Matabeleland North and Insiza district in Matabeleland South. Two deaths were reported in Mashonaland East and one each in Mashonaland West and Central and all are adult men who were clearing land for farming when the fires went out of hand. “However, four lives, all male adults were lost in veld fire related incidents in 2020 compared to three in 2019. The historic decrease in both area burnt and fire incidences recorded in 2020 is attributed to increased efforts on veld fire management by Ema and its partners working with communities in fire prone areas. “It will appear the coming in of Intwasa farming concept that was adopted by the country was a game changer as it discourages burning of biomass which in previous seasons had remained a major cause. It is actually assisting in reducing fires because farmers are no longer clearing and burning land for farming as they use the biomass as mulch,” added Mrs Sidange. She said besides awareness campaigns and education, other initiatives such as bee keeping which attach value to the environment also contributed to reduction. Mrs Sidange said because of the lockdown, Ema could not reach out to all communities to raise awareness but at the same time limited human activity as a result of Covid-19 regulations also contributed to a reduction in incidences especially along highways. Ema also used media for awareness campaigns. 10 150,4km of fireguards were created across the country protecting about 1 040 504,3ha of land while hay and thatch grass harvesting also protected about 14 481,1ha of prime land. Ema contends that attaching value to natural resources is critical in environment management. Law enforcement also remained key in reducing incidences with 153 tickets issued by Ema countrywide. Four perpetrators are set to be taken to court. A total of 851 fire related environmental prevention orders were issued before the onset of the fire season, Mrs Sidange said. She said while the statutory fire season has ended, communities need to be vigilant, adding that the agency will continue monitoring veld fires until effective rains are received. — @ncubeleon