The Chronicle Business Reporter
PAN-African telecoms group, Liquid Telecom, has announced a new partnership with Zayo Group Holdings, a global leader of communications infrastructure, which allows the two companies to leverage existing networks for increased business growth. Liquid Telecom has footprint across 13 countries primarily in eastern and southern Africa including Zimbabwe where it serves mobile operators, carriers, enterprise, media and content companies with high-speed connectivity. “This strategic partnership will assist many of our African customers who are looking to extend into operations beyond Africa as well as those customers who already have operations in Europe and the US,” Liquid Telecom’s Group chief executive officer, Mr Nic Rudnick, said in an update. “We have long been committed to building Africa’s digital future, and know that for African companies to be competitive, they have to be a part of the global digital economy. According to Liquid Tel, the new partnership will see both companies adding value for their customers by utilising each other’s network reach. The partnership will also allow Zayo’s customers to tap into the extensive and reliable connectivity that Liquid Telecom has built across the African continent through Zayo’s self-service platform, Tranzact. “This partnership demonstrates Zayo’s commitment to expanding our footprint and our ability to deliver bandwidth wherever and whenever customers require it,” said Jesper Aagaard, managing director of Europe at Zayo Group. “We are excited to bring Zayo’s global reach to Africa, enabling access into key locations in North America and Europe. Our innovative Tranzact platform is a key tool for this access, as it integrates bandwidth into an ‘online shopping’ experience, making purchasing and managing bandwidth easy to navigate and understand.” The partnership represents a crucial building block as Liquid Telecom embarks on its strategic vision to become Africa’s premier digital services provider. Liquid Telecom seeks to provide its customers with a variety of digital services under one roof. The company has built Africa’s largest independent fibre network, stretching more than 73 000km and operates state-of-the-art data centres in Johannesburg, Cape Town, Nairobi, Harare and Kigali, with a combined potential 19 000 square metres of rack space and 78 MW of power. With Africa continuing to establish itself as an increasingly important market in the global ecosystem, the partnership allows Zayo the opportunity to tap into Liquid Telecom’s expansive network to key locations around the continent and bringing seamless connectivity to Zayo’s customers across the globe. “Our customers are at the very core of our operations and this partnership will be the first of many as we continue in our endeavours to become a world-class digital services provider in Africa and beyond,” said Mr Rudnick.