The Chronicle Andile Tshuma, Gender HERE’S to the fathers, the brothers, the partners and the sons. Sometimes, as we undergo bad experiences with the men, we tend to assume and believe that all men are the same. But they aren’t. Let’s respect them for their individuality and let’s appreciate them for their presence in our lives. We know life is never as beautiful without them. Happy International Men’s Day, a celebration of the positive value men bring to the world, their families and communities. This year running under the theme ‘‘better health for men and boys’’, the day rallies all to strive towards better health and it takes a whole community to ensure better health for men and boys, just as it takes all of us to strive for better health for women and girls. The objective of International Men’s Day is to focus on improving gender relations, promoting gender equality, discrimination between men and boys, improvement of men’s and boys’ health and also to promote the humanitarian values. It evokes the responsibility to work together to improve the lives of men and boys all over the globe. So much is said about women and celebrating them and their successes and advocating for their rights, often the men are forgotten, along with their efforts, their hard work, their sacrifices, their silent struggles, their dreams, their aspirations, their fears. Most if not all the time, nobody really cares. Dear men, for all that you do for your communities and your families. It is noticed and it is appreciated. The men that stand up for senior citizens in public spaces, those that help strangers expecting nothing in return, those that stand up for bullied children, those that stand up for the rights of women and children. Thank you, we cherish you. To those men that are silently going through difficult times but will still get home with a smile and carry on through the day, it shall be well. Dear men, well it is not every day that you are told you are special, but you are. You are our fathers, our brothers, our friends, or boyfriends, our husbands, our uncles, or sons, our colleagues, our bosses. Here’s to the men that add value to our dreams. Our cheer leaders. Wishing all the men, who have been a help to the society, a very happy men’s day. We can’t dream of a happy nation without you. Zimbabwe is a better place with all of you playing your important roles in your various spheres. Bulawayo is a happier city with you. Homes are warm when you are there. To the women, remember to wish the men in your lives a beautiful Men’s Day, even if it’s belated. They deserve it. And on this day, let’s rewind this line in our minds that “men are not all the same.” On this day, let’s appreciate the beautiful creation of nature. Let’s respect both men and women equally and build a remarkable society for our future generation. Under this year’s theme better health for men and boys, let there be practical improvements to the health and well-being of the male population. To Be a Real Man Means to Know How to Face Your Mistakes, How to Forgive, Learn to Love, and Try to Help Everyone Who Needs You. Thanks for the Strength, Support, and Love You Constantly Shower us with. As a daughter, one of the biggest blessings is a father who is there to believe you, support you and love you and on this Men’s Day, I realise that I was blessed with the most amazing father I could ever imagine. As a woman, all you need is a life partner who will be there for you, protect you, support you, walk with you, encourage you, work with you, play with you, cheer you, be your honest critique and inspire you. I am blessed to have one such person in my life. As a girl, growing up, it is always special to have a big brother to protect you, guide you, and to inspire you, I cannot imagine my childhood without my brother, the deputy parent. We may not always agree on things, but I know he has my best interests at heart. As women across the world continue waging a war against patriarchy and reservations related to it, men as well, are supporting women as they fight for their rights. However, it must be noted that feminism does not advocate robbing men of their rights and handing them over to women. The same phenomena must be taught to boys from an early age to ensure that they support the ideology behind an equal world and do not grow up to be phobic of a gender-neutral society. Steps must be taken to ensure the creation of a world where equal rights are reserved for men as well as women in all facets of the society. Today we celebrate the men who have demonstrated that there is no need for a man to use physical force to show the strength that he carries within him. It is a matter of facing challenges of life without fear. We also celebrate men who have not been swallowed by patriarchy, but are supportive of women and are not intimidated by their success. Here’s also to the man who have been ‘‘monsters’’ before, but have changed and are now a pleasant presence to those around them, your journey towards being better men renews hope in humanity. Let us celebrate the unsung heroes of our daily life and ensure that they know this day exists, for them. In today’s world, a lot of praise goes to women and the celebration of womanhood, shedding light on their struggles and successes, a number of days are there for commemorating women and their struggles, however fewer people mark international men’s’ day. Yet, so many men are also victims of abuse, male victims of sexism are going through mental health problems and need help. Dear men, we appreciate your efforts, achievements your dreams and your aspirations. For all the little things and the big things you do, we appreciate you. We love you. Keep shining. A lady’s life principally spins around two genuine characters that hold large noteworthiness in her life and that is dad and her better half. After her dad, if there is a man that can take great consideration of affection and ensures her in all difficulties, at that point, he must be her better half. The other one that comes close is the brother. Siblings resemble a beam of splendid daylight, continually lighting our ways and giving us warmth. They are the best individuals in our lives whom we can depend on and share our mysteries with. Let those people know they are special. Happy Men’s Day. — @andile_tshuma