The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu
Showbiz Correspondent
Gender-based violence (GBV) and its associated vices are being brought out through a dance theatre piece called Kwanele (Enough) that hopes to change people’s mindset on the social ill. As Zimbabwe joins the world in commemorating 16 Days of Activism against Gender-Based Violence, the Alexander Dance Lab based in Bulawayo, has come up with the dance theatre piece. Chronicle Showbiz got a chance to watch the two actors, Alexander Mhlanga and Nomvuyiso Mabi act out the dance play during rehearsals in Bulawayo. The dance theatre piece will be premiered online next week Friday on the Alexander Dance Lab YouTube channel. It focuses more on the dance part of the story where the moves exude emotion, fear, terror and act out the violent nature of GBV in all its facets. The first part of the play is about the man being the abuser, be it verbally or physically or sexually. The intriguing thing is not one word is uttered, but the dances bring out the story. The second part of the dance play is when the tables have turned and now the woman is fighting back. The writer and director, Mhlanga said the play reveals the pain of being in a relationship fraught with GBV. “Kwanele (Enough) focuses on the dark cloud of pain that one goes through in a relationship as they suffer in silence. The production aims to change people’s perception on the abuses at home and at the workplace. Thereafter, we want to encourage safe homes and dialogue between couples whenever there’s a misunderstanding,” said Mhlanga. He said working on the play was a challenge as not many people understand dance as a form of expression. “The issues tackled here are very serious and to present them well, I decided to work on a play that uses dance. It’s a challenge to bring your A game all the time because you want people to see the message of the piece through the dance and body language,” said Mhlanga. He said he hopes to take the play around the country and show the severity of GBV. — @bonganinkunzi