The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
FOLLOWING last week’s embarrassing episode that saw the national Under-17 team being expelled from the Cosafa juniors tournament in South Africa due to suspected age-cheating, focus will be on the Under-20 men’s side that leaves for a similar competition next Monday. The Under-17 side arrived in the country from South Africa yesterday. Social media has been littered with comments from Zimbabwean soccer followers blasting Zifa for taking overaged players for the junior tournament that left the nation embarrassed, while others warned Under-20 technical team to take “correct aged” players when they leave for South Africa next Monday. The Cosafa Under-20 competition will run from December 3-13. The squad has been training in Harare under the guidance of head coach Tonderai Ndiraya who is being assisted by Mandla Mpofu and Nesbert Saruchera. Innocent Chogugudza is the goalkeepers’ trainer. Three players from Bulawayo have left the Under-20 camp, with the duo of Bulawayo City’s defender Mpumelelo Bhebhe and Bantu Leopards striker Ceasar Dube ruled out for selection because of lack of passports. Bhebhe’s club manager Ronald Sibanda called the national team coach Ndiraya yesterday, advising him that the player has received his passport, but was told that time has run out and the former Bantu Rovers defender has missed “lots” of training days. Highlanders juniors’ striker Mthabisi Ncube has also been released from camp after picking up an ankle injury during training. Unlike in the Under-17 side where players from Bulawayo were frozen out, six players remained in camp after the withdrawal of the trio of Bhebhe, Dube and Ncube. Players from Bulawayo making it into the 30-member provisional squad are Bulawayo Chiefs pair of goalie Mattripples Mleya and defender Malvern Hativagone, Bukhosi Maseko of First Division side Trukumb, strikers Munashe Pini from Chicken Inn and Andrea Siziba of Bulawayo City. Attacking midfielder Lexington Mujokoro from FMSA completes the list of Bulawayo-based players in camp. National Under-20 squad
Goalkeepers
1. Tendai Chirara ( Ngezi Platinum Stars)
2.Tatenda Makoni (Dzivarasekwa Academy)
3. Mattriples Nleya (Bulawayo Chiefs) Defenders
4. Malvern Hativagone (Bulawayo Chiefs)
5. Thomas Mudzengerere (Prince Edward Academy)
6. Tinotenda Muringai (Dynamos)
7. Kelvin Mangiza (FC Platinum)
8. Munashe Chakuchichi (BN Academy)
9. Munashe Garan’anga (Ubuntu, South Africa)
10. Munashe Katondo (Ngezi Platinum Stars)
11. Bukhosi Maseko (Trukumb)
12. Kundai Mhembere (Yadah Stars) Midfielders
13. Donald Mukunga (Harare City)
14. Kelvin Rateiwa (Dynamos)
15. Sebastian Summerfield (Gateshead FC, England)
16. Lexington Mujokoro (FMSA Umguza)
17. Mernard Matsikidze (Highlands Park, South Africa)
18. Kudakwashe Nyakudanga (Black Rhinos)
19. Brendon Nyagurungo (Caya Foot Academy, Senegal)
20. Oscar Magejo (Academy Twenty 63)
21. Culum English-Brown (Eintracht Norderstedt 03, Germany)
22. Bill Antonio (Prince Edward Academy)
23. Panashe Mutimbanyoka (FC Platinum)
24. Tendai Matindife (Ngezi Platinum Stars)
25. Debbellar Mapuwa (Legends Academy) Strikers
26. Munashe Pini (Chicken Inn)
27. Tapiwa Mandinyenya (Aces Youth Academy)
28. Thandolwenkosi Ngwenya (FC Platinum)
29. Andrea Siziba (Bulawayo City)
30. Tawanda Bhunu (Golden Eagles— @ZililoR