The Chronicle LIVERPOOL forward Mohamed Salah is back in training and could face Atalanta in the Champions League today. The 28-year-old missed Sunday’s 3-0 win over Leicester after testing positive for coronavirus while on international duty with Egypt. But he has since tested negative and took part in training on Monday. Liverpool have a 100% record in this season’s Champions League and will reach the last 16 if they beat the Serie A side at Anfield (20:00 GMT). What can be decided in the Champions League this week? Salah scored against Atalanta in the away fixture – which Liverpool won 5-0 earlier this month – and has netted 10 goals so far this season, two in the Champions League. Liverpool’s list of injuries remains long, with centre-backs Virgil van Dijk and Joe Gomez long-term absentees, and captain Jordan Henderson, fellow midfielder Thiago Alcantara and right-back Trent Alexander-Arnold all still unavailable. Midfielder Naby Keita went off with an apparent muscular injury against Leicester on Sunday. Reds boss Jurgen Klopp said: “Atalanta are a threat even without a point to prove. We were exceptional (in Italy). We did everything right and it all came together. They’re a top team with a special way to play. I expect problems in this game.” Forward Roberto Firmino could feature after scoring against Leicester at the weekend, his second goal of the season in nine appearances. “Scoring was always important for Bobby, but he is a complete footballer,” said Klopp. “Football is like an orchestra and if you have different people for instruments some of them are louder, but all are important for the rhythm. Bobby can play without [goals] as well. “We always celebrate goals – but this one was really emotional. The players read the newspapers and they saw some of the criticism.” Early qualification from their Champions League group would potentially allow the Reds to rest players for the final two matches. Klopp is among the Premier League managers to criticise the fixture schedule this season. “There are so many games to play and we will try to be as spot on as we can in specific games. It’s not all worked on the pitch because the schedule doesn’t give us that time,” added the German. — SuperSport