The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
THE Zimbabwe National Defence University (ZNDU) has embarked on a training programme to equip its students and staff on strategic transformation as part of efforts to making drastic and significant operating-model changes required to unlock value in line with Vision 2030. The university held a one-day workshop in Bulawayo yesterday to equip participants with the requisite skills. The programme also affords participants exposure to the practical side of what they learn as experts provide new dimensions on how to do strategic planning. ZNDU Vice-Chancellor Air Vice-Marshal Michael Tedzani Moyo said the training programme would assist participants when they occupy positions at strategic levels. “This is a new approach where you must start with your transformation as an individual before you can transform an organisation. This is part of the syllabus that we conduct, and as part of the theory, we are exposed to the practical side of the theory. This is one such exposure where we have practitioners in that field who then give the dimension on how to go about in terms of strategic planning,” he said. “Basically, it is a learning process and at the end of the day we will write a number of papers, some individually, others collectively. This kind of exposure will contribute towards the production of those papers. The workshop is one of the tools to empower students to enable them to go through the programme including writing assignments and strategic papers.” Air Vice-Marshal Moyo said they have held a number of workshops with different focuses. “We have had a number of workshops with different themes. We have had two in collaboration with the Zimbabwe Tourism Authority in Harare and Masvingo. We also had one in Chimanimani to do with post-Cyclone Idai disaster management and reconstruction. We run these workshops as and when we deem them relevant to achieve a certain objective of training,” he said. Air Vice-Marshal Moyo said ZNDU is guided by Vision 2030, which aims at transforming Zimbabwe into a middle-upper economy. “We are a segment of the nation of Zimbabwe and whatever we do as an organisation, we are guided by the national vision. Whatever we do should therefore speak to the discourse of Vision 2030,” he said. ZNDU will visit Binga as part of an aspect on traditional governance in its curriculum. “We are going to visit Chief Sikalenge in Binga because our curriculum includes traditional, local and national governance. This aspect is of traditional governance and we have some who have never been to a chief’s court. We are going to meet the chief and his people as part of training,” said Air Vice-Marshal Moyo. “We are saying in case our students and staff find themselves in positions of authority tomorrow they must have knowledge on how different sections of society behave and their different expectations.” — @mashnets