The Chronicle Ishemunyoro Chingwere, Harare Bureau
INDUSTRY and Commerce Minister, Dr Sekai Nzenza, has reiterated that the customer is king as she challenged businesses to strive to deliver consumer satisfactory products. The “customer is king” or the “customer is always right” motto demands that businesses give a high priority to customer satisfaction. The adage was popularised by pioneer retailers — Harry Gordon, John Wanamaker and Marshall Field at the start of the 20th Century who argued that the success of a business requires serious attention to tackling customer needs and complaints so that consumers do not feel cheated or deceived. Dr Nzenza stressed the need to prioritise customer needs when she officiated at the launch of a book by renowned customer relations expert, Dr Mthokozisi Nkosi, titled “New Generation Customer Service” in Harare last week. The call to prioritise customer relations comes at a time Zimbabwe and the world at large, are grappling with the effects of Covid-19 pandemic, which has pushed several businesses onto the brink. As a result, some businesses are tempted to do short cuts and in the process compromise on quality of goods and service. “It is refreshing to note that the launch (of the book) is running under the theme, ‘The magic of service: creating, maintaining and enhancing strong long-term relationships with key stakeholders through service’. I am happy that this theme is a warning to all businesses,” said Dr Nzenza. “Service providers that fail to meet the expectations of their customers will be consigned to the dustbin of history and it will judge them ruthlessly. “It is my sincere hope that key decision makers in both the public sector and business will take time to appreciate the thought-provoking work by Dr Nkosi and walk the talk of customer service. “The adage that the ‘customer is king’ clearly points to organisations that have to do everything possible to satisfy the needs of their customers who ultimately pay the salaries of all employees.” The Minister said improved customer service was the foundation for successful business entities and if practised by all, it will translate to economic and social growth in the country. Speaking at the same event, Chartered Institute of Customer Relationship Management (CICRM) Council chairman, Professor Zororo Muranda, said the launch of the book was a milestone towards enhanced customer service. Dr Nkosi said the book was a culmination of his three decades in business and some of which has seen him exposed to world class customer service that he shares through his works. “This is a result of work-related experience of over three decades and having been exposed to world class organisations, I think I have an obligation to pass my experiences,” said Dr Nkosi. “The book goes at length in giving people what it really means when one is said to be customer centric because in as much as most companies are saying they are customer centric, my experience shows that they probably don’t understand what it means,” he said. The Covid-19 pandemic has brought a new order that requires service providers to follow customers and study their consumption behaviours and failure to adhere to that will see them going under. There are businesses that are going to completely change their models due to demands caused by Covid-19, while others are not going to withstand the pressures caused by the pandemic and close shop completely.