The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
The Roil Bulawayo Arts Awards night will now be scaled down because of the rise in Covid-19 cases in the city. As such, there will be no nominees’ dinner with the arrival of nominees on the night being staggered. The fourth edition of the RoilBAAs will be held virtually next week Saturday. The awards will take place at the Large City Hall with limited tickets pegged at US$10 and US$20 for VIPs already on sale. The biggest dress up event in the city will not have the extravagance of a huge audience due to the Covid-19 pandemic that has gripped the world. According to organisers, the event will be streamed from a separate venue for a minimal fee for those wanting a red-carpet experience away from the actual awards. “The traditional nominees’ dinner will not happen this year. This is part our efforts to adhere to Government regulations regards the virus. However, in light of all this, nominees will still receive their certificates on the day of the awards,” read a statement from event organisers. They went on to explain how the awards ceremony will be held. “In the same vein of keeping attendees safe, we will stagger the arrival of nominees and their awards with nine awards every hour. We are finalising holding areas, the red carpet and event schedule,” read the statement. Spokesperson Nkululeko Nkala said the tickets that are on sale are for a few fans of the show who would like to experience the RoilBAAs live. The streaming sites for those who will follow the event from the comfort of their homes will be released next week. He added that voting which closes tomorrow is going on well and encouraged fans to continue voting for their favourite artistes. “For the bulk of the awards, voting ends on the 22nd of November with the exception of five awards which will be voted for until the final hour of the awards. The five are Outstanding Video, Outstanding Dance group, Outstanding Song of the Year, Outstanding Newcomer of the Year and Outstanding Radio DJ of the year.” – @bonganinkunzi