The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
A.E.I.O.U hit-maker, Novuyo Seagirl says she was at the brink of calling it quits on recording her debut album after her producer, Lance Hebron lost the recordings when he was mugged in South Africa where he is based. The nine-track album titled Love, ‘Bitter & Sweet’ was supposed to be released by now, but due to the mishap, Seagirl has been forced to travel to the neighbouring country to restart working on the album from scratch. Seagirl who travelled to South Africa two weeks ago said: “I had to come all the way to South Africa to physically be here and work on the album. My producer had an unfortunate event where he was mugged and we lost the project. “So now, we had to start afresh. Before, we’d just email each other files,” said Seagirl. She said she does not know when the album will be released because of the delay. “Since we’ve had to start from scratch, it’s a long process especially if you want quality. We’re taking our time so we make sure we give our fans the best.” At one point, Seagirl, a former Starbrite winner said she felt like throwing in the towel because of the challenges she encountered in coming up with the album. “I’ve faced so many challenges with the production of this album and almost gave up on it. But good friends have been my source of comfort always reminding me that all good things come to those who wait and that when I face such challenges, it becomes worthy. As such, I’ve had to soldier on,” she said. Sharing the contents of the album, the award-winning artiste said it was about her love experiences. “It’s titled Love, ‘Bitter & Sweet’. It’s an expression of love experiences that I’ve personally faced. The bitter side of it and the sweet side of it. We all experience love in different ways and this is my story,” she said. The album, Seagirl said consists of eight tracks with her breakthrough song, A.E.I.O.U that was produced by Hebron being a bonus track. Featured on the album are artistes, La Dee who is based in South Africa, Lance Hebron and Qeqeshiwe Mntambo. Before she travelled to South Africa, Seagirl had been working with local house DJ Cooperman and Bob Skinah on a song titled Ng’zobuya. The single will be released soon.