The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter HATE or love him, the local game will miss Dutchman Hendrik Pieter de Jongh’s character. His arrival in Zimbabwe was marred in controversy, with some quarters alleging that Bosso had hired a fraudster. On arrival he had coached 22 football clubs in a career spanning 29 years. De Jongh, 49, started his coaching career in 1990 as a 20-year-old rookie following a career ending injury. He had stints in Kenya, South Africa, Rwanda, Swaziland before setting the Zimbabwean topflight league alight at the end of last year. Never one to shy away from the spotlight, De Jongh polarised opinion in his short stint in Zimbabwean football. He is not one to hide his feelings and speaks his mind all the time. In his short tenure De Jongh became a huge critic of both the Zimbabwe Football Association (Zifa) and Premier Soccer League (PSL). His sentiments from time to time won him followers while some thought he was just a loud mouth and cry baby. It is certain that everyone has an opinion on the Dutchman but there is no denying his character added some feel in local football. Some who worked closely with him at Bosso say the Dutchman was a difficult person to work with but away from his off the pitch drama, De Jongh backed his rants with results. He was likened to a “messiah” during his short stint with Highlanders after notching up some victories that resulted in Bosso finishing sixth on the table even though it seemed they would finish further down the pecking order. In total, he oversaw 15 games in all competitions with Bosso and only lost once to Bulawayo Chiefs in a league encounter. He went on to guide Bosso to the Chibuku Super Cup before writing a piece of history for himself by going on to win the Castle Challenge Cup with FC Platinum ironically, he beat Highlanders in the final. De Jongh has since parted ways with FC Platinum, his unexpected sacking coming after a directive by Caf that the Dutchman will not be allowed to sit on the bench during Champions league matches because he does not have a Uefa Pro licence as he holds a Uefa A coaching badge. De Jongh is a holder of a Uefa A Licence but Caf recently changed the rules with the continental football controlling body now demanding a Uefa Pro Licence for coaches trained outside Africa to take charge in inter-club competitions. “The champ is very ok and did receive different offers from different countries. The champ is very soon back on the pitch. The champ is the champ,” said the Dutchman on Monday. He has vowed he will be back. His return, should it happen, will be interesting.— @innocentskizoe