The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
The country did not record any Covid-19 positive cases among teachers and pupils during the just-ended Cambridge examinations, a development attributed to strict adherence to Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). Cambridge examinations, written mainly by pupils attending private schools, started at the end of September and ended this month. Grade Seven candidates will be the first to sit for the Zimbabwe School Examinations Council (Zimsec) public exams next month, with results set to be published in the same month to allow them ample time to look for Form One places for next year. The Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education introduced the mandatory SOPs designed to guide teachers and learners to brace for a new normal and shun customs such as hugs, handshakes and sharing of desks as they used to. Break and lunch time are staggered to prevent crowding by learners while sporting activities have been banned. In the past pupils or teachers who were not feeling well could attend classes but in the new normal this will be prohibited as the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education has adopted a stay at home policy for those feeling unwell until they recover. Covid-19 is known to be more deadly among those with underlying diseases, hence schools are now required to keep records for teachers and pupils with underlying conditions without stigmatising them. A maximum of 35 pupils are permitted in a single classroom as learners and teachers are required to maintain a physical or social distance of one metre at the school premises. In an interview yesterday, Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education director of communications and advocacy, Mr Taungana Ndoro said they were excited that Cambridge Examinations went on without any Covid-19 positive cases being recorded. He attributed the positive development to the strict adherence to SOPs. “The country recorded zero Covid-19 positive cases among teachers and pupils during the just ended Cambridge examinations, a development attributed to the strict adherence to Standard Operating Procedures. So, at the moment the Ministry is pleased with the successful completion of the Cambridge examinations where no single case of Covid-19 was reported,” said Mr Ndoro. He said the Ministry urged schools to implement religiously SOPs for the safety of the learners and teachers. “We have called upon all schools to put all hands-on deck in intensifying adherence to SOPs,” said Mr Ndoro.
He said teachers reporting for duty were filling in registers adding that pictures were being taken at schools as part of a communication and advocacy initiative by the ministry. “Taking pictures is for SOPs but a register doesn’t need pictures. Pictures of SOPs are for our communications and advocacy purposes. Our strategy as the Division of Communications and Advocacy is to publicise adherence to SOPs to the public to allay any fears of non-compliance with SOPs,” said Mr Ndoro. While no Covid-19 positive cases were reported at Cambridge examination-writing private schools, infections have been reported at a number of public and mission schools countrywide. Among them are John Tallach High in Matabeleland North where 184 pupils tested positive, Emakhandeni Primary in Bulawayo, Matopo High in Matabeleland South and Prince Edward in Harare.