The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter
THE Government is working on eradicating “bush” boarding facilities which tend to expose girls to a number of dangers, Vice-President Kembo Mohadi has said. Bush boarding facilities comprise shacks which accommodate pupils living far away from schools that have no boarding facilities. Individual pupils build the shacks mainly from pole and dagga and cook for themselves. At these makeshift compounds, there are no basic facilities such as toilets and bathrooms and pupils have to improvise thereby exposing themselves to risks of contracting diseases. Bush boarding facilities have never, even in the best of situations, been conducive for pupils. There are no adults to supervise the pupils and as such its a free-for-all at these boarding facilities thereby exposing especially girls to sexual abuse. Ideally a ward in Zimbabwe should have a primary school and about three or four primary schools should be served by a secondary school. The Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education Ambassador Cain Mathema recently said there is a shortage of about 3 000 schools in Zimbabwe. Speaking during a tour at St Paul Mandlakhe High School in Lupane yesterday, VP Mohadi said ensuring the safety of the girl child was one of Government’s top priorities. He said the state-of-the-art laboratory which is under construction at the school was going to a go a long way in cultivating the love for science, technology, engineering and mathematics. “We are here at St Paul’s Amandlethu AMR High School to see the progress regarding the constructions of a girls hostel and an advanced level laboratory whose construction is being sponsored in partnership with Ubuntu Schales Trust and World Vision,” said VP Mohadi. “The Construction of a girls’ hostel is something quite significant to Government given the value we accord to the girl child in our society. The hostel will provide decent accommodation and other modern amenities needed for a conducive learning environment. Government is working on eradicating what I would term bush boarding facilities still prevalent in some of our schools in rural areas where learners especially the girl child are exposed to all manner of vices.” He said the state-of-the-art Advanced Level laboratory will offer learners a platform to hone skills and knowledge desired from the competency-based curriculum. “The construction of the lab is in line with the country’s education system that has a bias on science, technology, mathematics engineering. Our education system now seeks to develop a complete rounded person with Ubuntu and capable of research and innovation that fosters creativity and industrialisation for our nation,” said VP Mohadi. Pupils at the school also showcased their agro-based projects which include cattle and goat rearing. The livestock projects were a result of eager parents who due to financial constraints decided to give the school goats and cows so that their children could access education. Part of the projects also include the keeping of turkeys which the school uses to complement meals for the pupils. VP Mohadi commended the school for instilling entrepreneurship values to the pupils saying every school in Zimbabwe should work towards being a business centre. “The vibrant cattle goat and turkey projects that I have seen are in line with the Government’s quest for a competency-based curriculum which is a vehicle for education with production and ultimately the attainment of vision 2030. We have put in place an education system that seeks to mound learners who can convert theory into goods and services that are of use to you and me,” said VP Mohadi. According to the Vice-President, the curriculum is preparing learners for life and work in a larger agro-based economy and in an increasingly globalised and competitive environment. “The Government under its vision 2030 seeks to invest in sufficient state-of-the-art facilities like science labs in schools working in collaboration with other partners and stakeholders. Our country considers access to a high quality and relevant education for all learners as a basic right and a foundation that underpins social economic development of our country.” — @thamamoe