The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
CABINET has approved the Zimbabwe Independent Complaints Commission Bill, which will enable complaints from members of the public against members of the security services to be investigated in line with constitutional requirements. The objective of the Bill is to provide for the establishment of an independent complaints mechanism for members of the public against members of the security services. In a post-Cabinet briefing in Harare yesterday, Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa said the Bill seeks to provide for an independent complaint’s mechanism for members of the public, against members of the security service pursuant to Section 210 of the Constitution. “Cabinet considered and approved the Zimbabwe Independent Complaints Commission Bill, 2020 as presented by the Minister of Justice, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. The Bill seeks to provide for an independent complaints mechanism for members of the public, against members of the security service pursuant to Section 210 of the Constitution,” she said. Minister Mutsvangwa said the complaints mechanism is to be intermediated by a body which is independent of the security services. “Accordingly, the Bill establishes a Commission to carry out this function with a view to remedying any harm caused by any misconduct on the part of any member of the security services,” she said. The commission will investigate complaints against members of the security services and ensure that offending members are brought to account through recommendations for disciplinary action to be taken against them and appropriate remedies to be granted to complainants. It will also investigate practices which are in contravention of Section 206(2) and (3) of the Constitution which require that national security be pursued with the utmost respect for the fundamental rights and freedoms of citizens as well as the rule of law. “The Commission must also, through investigation, ensure compliance by members of the security services with Section 208 of the Constitution which requires them to be non-partisan. The Commission will have a contact person from each security sector who would address issues in their respective sectors,” Minister Mutsvangwa said. Meanwhile, the Minister said the National Joint Negotiating Council (NJNC) has agreed on a cost of living adjustment (COLA) for civil servants effective November 1. “Cabinet is pleased to advise that the National Joint Negotiating Council (NJNC) has agreed on the following Cost of Living Adjustment (COLA) for civil servants’ remuneration: an average salary increase of 41 percent of the total package effective from 1st November, 2020, payment of annual bonus inclusive of transport and housing allowance staggered over the months of November and December,” she said. NJNC also agreed that negotiations will continue taking into account the cost of living and prevailing economic conditions. “The council further agreed to come up with a roadmap by end of January 2021 informed by the National Budget to continuously review conditions of service with a view to maintaining the value of salaries,” Minister Mutsvangwa said. —mashnets