The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
THERE is a lady the nation should look out for as she is bringing fire and flavour to the fast-rising online television platform, Nash TV. Her name is Nomagugu Ncube and on TV, she proudly refers to herself as Noma Is’nqand’amathe, isqaml’amayezi, is’qabhobho esakoNcube. She presents on weekends when she sometimes presents the popular Nash TV Friday night live shows. She is outstanding, from her diverse languages, charisma, confidence on stage and general vibe which many lack. Each time she takes to the mic, she makes people get glued to the online show which can be watched on various social media pages. Hailing from Bulawayo’s oldest suburb, Pelandaba, Noma is slowly becoming the face of a brand which is the brainchild of businessman Tinashe Mutarisi. Saturday Leisure recently caught up with the Bulawayo-bred presenter to get to know her better. “Some people call me Nyce but on TV, I’m Noma Is’nqand’amathe, isqaml’amayezi, is’qabhobho esakoNcube,” said the soft-spoken presenter. “I was born on the 2nd of March 1992 at Pelandaba Clinic in Bulawayo. That’s where I grew up. I’ve always loved presenting and it’s something I wanted to try out, but didn’t have the courage,” she said. It was only after a call for presenters from her UFIC church that Noma decided to try out her presenting skills. “I only got the courage after the church I attend, UFIC announced that it was looking for presenters for the church’s channel — Christ TV. I went for it although I was nervous. I gave it my best shot and I got the spot. That’s how it all started,” she said. Narrating her career journey at Nash TV, Noma said: “Nash TV has been amazing. From the day that I auditioned, I’ve improved my craft greatly. The best thing is that I’m surrounded by a team that encourages me to do better, specifically the boss Mr Tinashe Mutarisi. From him, I’ve learnt that you need to work hard to become the person you want to be. “Nothing comes easy so if you don’t put in the work yourself, no one else will do it for you. When things become a bit hectic at work, he works with us even on things some might call dirty work. Imagine a whole prominent businessman helping his employees. That alone has not only taught me to be humble, but to work hard and be focused.” Noma said working with former Power FM presenter, Butterphly Phunk has kept her up on bad days. “I’m not only a presenter, as I get to explore and learn new things on a daily basis through my immediate boss — Butterphly Phunk. Imagine getting to work closely with a person who’s always inspired me. “I learnt a lot from watching her closely and love that she’s always there to hold my hand when I develop cold feet.” The passionate presenter said she was grateful to Nash TV for believing in her and giving her a platform to shine. Other than presenting, Noma who seems to be a woman of many talents, said she is into music. She once participated in the Star Brite talent search competition in 2017 where she was the overall winner for the 2017/2018 season. “I’ve worked with Minister Michael Mahendere and this year, I featured on Enzo Ishall’s music video — Vakamhanya Makarimwa where I was the lead act. It’s all thanks to videographer, Vusa Blaqs who brought out this greatness in me,” she said. Having relocated to Harare at the age of 21, the 28-year-old artiste said rubbing shoulders with the who is who in the arts industry has been a blessing as she feels she is making her mother proud. “Honestly, all I want is to make my mother proud. She’s one person I knew would do anything for me. Above everything else, what drives me is knowledge that God didn’t give me all these talents for me to just sleep,” she said.– @mthabisi_mthire.