The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
LOCAL authorities should up their game in terms of handling devolution funds as the Government expects increased accountability for every cent disbursed to them. In line with the Constitution, the devolution agenda is at the heart of Government’s efforts to drive sustainable development across the country. Under this framework Treasury periodically allocates funds to councils to finance development projects at local level.
However, there has been concern that some councils have failed to effectively utilise the funds. “What we have seen so far in terms of devolution projects is that there is a need by councils to re-engineer themselves in view of funds and investments. “We cannot operate business as usual, it’s time we up our game,” said Midlands provincial development coordinator, Mr Abiot Maronge. He was speaking during a recent tour of projects undertaken through devolution funds at Kwekwe City Council. “We have seen situations where management, identification and even investment of devolution funds has been questionable. “We need to self-introspect and find ways of addressing the problems that we would have found out as council,” he said. Mr Maronge directed councils to formulate committees that handle and manage devolution funds to promote transparency and accountability. “There should be a committee that can be held accountable for the progress or lack of it regarding devolution funds,” he said. “It’s either you formulate a committee or you assign the duty to an already existing committee and advise the town clerk.” Mr Maronge implored local authorities to work closely with the private sector and Government departments. Kwekwe City received $10,2 million under devolution and is utilising the money on a number of projects that include conversion of Garandichauya Beer Hall into an infectious diseases’ centre. “We managed to buy material that will go a long way in the completion of our infectious disease hospital. “We are hoping that by the end of year we should have finished the project,” said city treasurer, Mrs Rejoice Dandira. The local authority also purchased road rehabilitation material like bitumen and concrete stones as well as solar street lights using the same funding. Mr Maronge also toured Zibagwe Rural District projects. The council is constructing clinics, classroom blocks and repairing boreholes using the devolution funds.