The Chronicle Tadious Manyepo, Harare Bureau
FORMER FC Platinum coach Hendrikus Pieter de Jongh says the decision by Caf to bar non-Caf A licence holders from directing operations in continental inter-club football competitions has left him a devastated man. FC Platinum’s bid to have the Dutch mentor exempted failed last week, resulting in the two parties mutually going their separate ways with the highly respected Norman Mapeza bouncing back at the helm of the Zvishavane-based miners. De Jongh is a holder of a Uefa A Licence but Caf recently changed the rules with the continental football controlling body now demanding a Uefa Pro Licence for coaches trained outside Africa to take charge in inter-club competitions. And the former Highlanders tactician, who was caught off guard by the latest rules change, was left with a bitter taste in his mouth. He said had it not been for the Covid-19 pandemic, he would have attained the qualifications by now. “I am a holder of a Uefa A International Diploma and had it not been for Covid-19, I would have completed the Uefa Pro Licence by now,” said De Jongh. “The Uefa Pro Licence is currently on hold due to Covid-19. What it means is at the moment there is nothing I can do as far as attaining that qualification is concerned,” De Jongh said. He said he will be back after attaining the qualification next year. “The Uefa Pro Licence will commence in June 2021 and I will be part of the class. I will be back. “But I am devastated beyond words. I am not saying Caf wasn’t supposed to change rules but the timing of the changes disadvantaged some of us. “I was taken on board by FC Platinum, a team I have so much respect for when there were no such issues like only Caf A licence holders allowed to sit on the bench for continental inter-club competitions. It came as a surprise due to the change of the rules especially after I had previously been allowed to direct operations in two matches for FC Platinum in this same competition.” De Jongh was set to lead the team in the Caf Champions League with his first hurdle being a preliminary round face off against Mozambique side Costa do Sol. “It’s really painful to say the least. I had worked hard to try and build a team in a short period of time after also putting a lot of effort to ensure the players remained focused in the seven months they were on lockdown. “You know when you have a team on you, which you have so much confidence in, you want to unleash it but then rules are rules. “I have so much respect in FC Platinum right from the board to the supporters that is why our separation with the team was very much mutual. “Whereever I will be, FC Platinum will remain etched in my heart, they are so professional. “It’s not their problem, neither is it my problem, we remain in good books. “I wish the team all the best in their future endeavours. I would like to thank the team in general, especially the president (Fabian Mashingaidze). The decision by Caf is definitely not good for both the club and me.” De Jongh backed Mapeza to excel at the helm of FC Platinum. “I have so much respect for Norman (Mapeza). He is arguably one of the best mentors around. I met him in August and we discussed at length on various football issues. “He is a nice person as far as he is also a good coach and I wish him all the best.” In a short period he has been with Zimbabwean clubs, De Jongh wrote a huge piece of history for himself after guiding Highlanders to the Chibuku Super Cup triumph last year before leading FC Platinum to the Castle Super Cup, ironically beating Highlanders in the final in March this year. 