The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
Seven is an important number biblically. It symbolises perfection and completeness. Having been born in 1987, 33-year-old rhumba musician, Mxolisi “Mr Bones” Ndlovu who launched his seventh album which has seven songs on November 7, strongly believes seven is his lucky number. This explains why he put his all in the production of his latest album. “This album is so special to me because since I started my musical journey, I’ve been looking forward to the 7th album. I was born in 1987 and always told those close to me that I’d give my all in my 7th album. “I did everything to make sure that I produce a master class because seven is my lucky number,” said the soft-spoken artiste. Listening to the album, one can tell that the artiste, like good wine is maturing musically with age. One has to listen to the composition in the album to appreciate this. In an age where most up-and-coming Rhumba musicians are flooding studios to record half-baked albums, Mr Bones has chosen to be one of the few who takes their craft seriously, taking his time to come up with this masterpiece. The Garamtata Finest front-man said what made the album a perfect production was the fact that he worked with the most sought-after Rhumba producer, Kholwani “TK” Dube at his TK studios. “TK, a great rhythmist now has his own studio where most Rhumba musicians are flocking to because the guy knows his stuff,” he said. Mr Bones said he took time to compose the songs as he wanted to come up with a timeless product. He said: “It took me two years to work on this album as my aim was to come up with a powerful message, not just to sing for the sake of it. I respect my fans and it’s my wish to play a huge part in making sure that more and more people respect rhumba music.” He said his compositions are inspired by life experiences, making him a social commentator. The seven-track album opens with uMthandazo Wehumutsha in which the musician pleads with God to intervene in his life for success. In Tshintsha Guluva, the musician rebukes married people saying they should focus on marriage and not dedicate time to unmarried people who can lead them astray. On the track Bayihlinzel’emgodleni, Mr Bones advises people to mind their own business. The artiste who is well known for promoting romance has two love songs on the album — Sthandwa Sami, an appeal for forgiveness from his lover while on I Ex Yami, the musician says no to second chances to a former lover who had dumped him. With the festive season around the corner, this album will definitely feature prominently on the dance floor with those who want to listen to good rhumba music catered for as well. – @themkhust