The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
NOMADIC striker Mitchelle Katsvairo will compensate Highlanders for the remainder of his contract after both parties agreed to terminate the forward’s contract so that he joins Botswana’s Township Rollers. The Gaborone-based former Botswana champions announced the arrival of Katsvairo on Monday. Katsvairo had two months of his one-year contract with Bosso left, having joined the Bulawayo soccer giants at the beginning of the year alongside veteran forward Mkhokheli Dube. The striker becomes the fourth Highlanders player to leave during the Covid-19 lockdown that affected Zimbabwe’s football programme. Katsvairo had only played one game for the Bulawayo giants, the Castle Challenge Cup which they lost 2-0 to champions FC Platinum at Barbourfields Stadium in March. The other players that left Bosso are national team striker Prince Dube who is having a great time at Tanzania’s Azam, forward Tinashe Makanda as well as midfielder Brian Banda who found home at FC Platinum. Dube was sold to Azam while Banda and Makanda walked out as free agents following expiry of their contracts in June. “Mitchelle Katsvairo had signed a one-year contract with the club. The contract was running out at the end of the year. There was mutual agreement of termination and compensation between the two parties. The player will compensate the club. So, we are privy to the developments. We would like to thank Katsvairo for his service and wish him all the best in his new endeavours,” said Highlanders spokesperson Ronald Moyo. The 30-year-old Katsvairo, had a failed trial stint at Township Rollers in 2018 before going to AFC Leopards after leaving Kaizer Chiefs. The ex-Chicken Inn and South Africa’s Free State Stars FC forward was released by Ngezi Platinum Stars halfway through his contract after failing to impress having joined them last year in July before coming to Bosso. Katsvairo had signed a one-year deal with Ngezi, after failing to make an impact at Free State Stars who were relegated to South Africa’s National First Division at the end of the 2018/19 Absa Premiership season. Some of the clubs that the nomadic striker who started his professional career at defunct Gunners FC Platinum played for are Harare City, Caps United and Singida United in Tanzania. — @ZililoR