The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
The likes of Madlela Skhobokhobo, Allen Ndoda and Mr Bones may want to up their game as a new player is threatening to dislodge them as she is dedicated and bringing new elements to the genre. This is none other than rhumba sensation, Pawada Moyo, Clement Magwaza’s wife who is following in her husband’s footsteps. Known as Pah in the music circles, Magwaza’s wife has been in the game for the past three years and has recorded two albums. Born in Matobo and bred in Kezi in Malaba village, the 36-year-old said her husband, whom she used to accompany to shows, made her love music leading her to discover her own singing talent. “My husband — Clement Magwaza inspired me to do music. I used to go with him to his shows and he used to give me the mic to perform one or two of his songs. He later advised me to learn how to sing and dance in front of audiences. “I took his advice and before I knew it, in 2017, I was in studio recording my own album. It wasn’t difficult as I loved music from a young age and dancing as well,” said Pah. She said she discovered that she was one of the first women to sing Tshibilika/Rhumba music in the country. “My genre of rhumba/tshibilika music is mixed with a little bit of kwasa making it more vibey,” she said. “In 2017, I released my first album that was titled Imini Iyeza. I’ve got two albums now with the second being Amathalenta ethu that I recorded this year.” Her debut album gave her the courage to continue singing after it was well received by the public. “After I released the first album, people enjoyed it a lot. I was also hired to perform in South Africa and Botswana which was a good start considering that I was a novice,” said Pah. Showing how serious she is, the musician has a band, Macrey Sounds, which she hopes to perform live with once lockdown measures are eased. The musician thanked her husband for inspiring and supporting her as she feels she is now more mature musically. Having been married in 2011 and with three kids, Pah said respect has been key in juggling their household duties and entertainment life. “I’m handling everything just fine. At home I’m a good wife who has dignity. At work, I’m a musician who knows how to behave as a married woman. We both know how to manage our relationship as the main thing is respect,” she said. Apart from music, Pah said the two are setting up businesses. – @mthabisi_mthire.