The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
THE Chevrons showed character and great mental strength in their 3rd ODI super over victory over Pakistan according to local cricket coach Pollock Mubobo. Sean Williams scored 118 runs as the visitors finished their innings with a score of 278/6. The match went to a Super Over as Pakistan finished their run chase at 278-9 in their 50 overs. Pakistan could only manage two runs as Iftikhar Ahmed (0) and Khushdil Shah (1) were dismissed by Blessing Muzarabani in the first four balls of their Super Over. Zimbabwe pair of Brendan Taylor and Sikandar Raza finished the chase in three balls to secure a victory. Despite losing the series 2-1, the Chevrons pocketed 10 points from their 3rd ODI victory, which sets them on the right path in their quest to get automatic qualification for the 2023 World Cup in India. The just ended three match ODI series formed part of the ICC World Cup Super League, which features 13 teams, the 12 ICC Full Members and the Netherlands, who qualified by winning the ICC World Cricket League Championship 2015-17, the Super League will see sides play eight three-match series each, four at home and four away. The sides failing to qualify directly will get a second shot through a qualifier. Each team gets 10 points for a win, five for a tie/no result/abandonment and none for a loss. Teams will be ranked according to total points earned across the eight series. The Chevrons who took part in the series without head coach Lalchand Rajput will take a lot of positives from the series. However, there are areas they need to work on particularly finding the right opening partnership and improving on fielding. “Obviously, there is a lot to do in terms of areas of fielding because clearly we could have done better especially in the last match. The coming back of Blessing Muzarabani has really helped a lot, leading the attack without Tendai Chatara and Kyle Jarvis he has done very well for a young bowler like him. I believe he has come back a better bowler. “Also, the selection of Donald Tiripano in the last match was also a good move. Some people were saying it’s a dead rubber but with World Cup qualification at stake there are no more dead rubbers so it’s important to win games whenever you can,” said Mubobo. Mubobo went on say the team had represented the country well. “If you look at it, we could have won the first game, l think the boys were really prepared and this was a good outing for the boys. As a group they did very well for the country. Going to Pakistan and winning a game is not easy it shows character and great mental strength, it’s not easy to win a game in Pakistan we all know that, so we have to give credit to the coaching staff and the players for a brilliant performance,” he said. The Chevrons will now shift to the T20 series pencilled in for November 7, 8, and 10. — @innocentskizoe