The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Acting Sports Editor
HIS wish was to play for the Bulawayo giants Highlanders but a number of reasons saw that dream not coming to fruition. From primary school at Lozikeyi in Nguboyenja and Sobukhazi High School across the street, he was a regular first team player, playing alongside the likes of Stanford Collymore Ncube, Petros Ngodzo, Anzlom Ndlovu among other names that went on to become household names in the local Premiership and even abroad like Ncube. James Brown can be likened to a flower that never blossomed. Those that saw him play still wonder why he never played in the highest league and even outside the country. His close friends Hlanganani Ngwenya and Melusi Mabaleka Sibanda all made a huge impact in the local football landscape. Ngwenya broke barriers and commanded a first team jersey at Hwange while Mabaleka can be counted as one of the most loyal sons of Highlanders. Brown even made the grade in England at Luton FC but his papers could not be processed because of complications with his visa. He had gone to the United Kingdom on a student visa. “I started playing club football for Thorngrove United under the late Joseph James, we were in Division Two then. I broke into the first team as a 17-year-old and by then there was stiff competition in the team and therefore breaking into the first team was not a joke,” says Brown. From Thongrove, which was also his home suburb, Brown crossed the floor and joined Central Mechanical Engineering Department (CMED) which was also in the Zifa Bulawayo Division Two League. “My decision to join CMED was mainly influenced by the need to get employment. The arrangement was that if you play five consecutive games you get employed. I remember during one of the national CMED tournaments in Harare I was captain and our team had the likes of Zenzo Moyo, Abraham Mbambo, Newman Ngwenya who had joined us from Air Zimbabwe. We also had Douglas Moyo,” says Brown as he was enjoying his cold bottle. An opportunity availed itself for Brown to go and study travel and tourism in Luton, England in 2002 but football was still in his blood and while there he tried his luck with Luton FC and made the grade. “Sadly I couldn’t get a playing contract because of my visa requirements which clearly stated that I was a student and therefore was not expected to get a professional contract. I even offered to play for free but they refused, saying the law did not allow them to do that,” he says with a sad face. Brown believes that had he been allowed to play in official games, he would have even represented the country. “Not that I’m bragging but I had the talent and I am cocksure that had I been given a chance to play some official games for Luton FC, national team coaches would certainly have called me but sadly it was not to be, such is life I guess,” he says. Brown now plays social soccer for Amavevane Football Club that plays in one of the most organised social leagues in Bulawayo, the Golden Oldies Social Soccer League.