The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
FOOTBALL giants Highlanders Football Club have begun working closely with local artistes as part of efforts to grow the city’s music industry. Bosso, as the Bulawayo-based team is known, wants to use its worldwide popularity to market artistes from the City of Kings and Queens with up-and-coming rapper D’lax being one of the first beneficiaries. The artiste recorded a song hailing Bosso titled Vele Angizwa and in return, the club offered him free usage of Barbourfields Stadium for the recording of the song’s visuals. Highlanders’ media liaison, Ronald Moyo said the initiative is meant to bring together the culture of music in football. “This is part of our commitment to work with artistes. Highlanders is more than just a football club, it’s a culture which has been communicated through different art forms including music. “Music has always been used to pass Bosso from generation to generation. As we continue trying to understand our fan base, we found the project interesting because the hip hop genre appeals to the current, young Bosso fans so it covers a generational gap,” he said. Moyo added: “Remember, we already have great Bosso songs by legendary artistes such as Lovemore Majaivana, Freddy Gwala and Zex Manatsa to mention but a few which have stood the test of time. We have also seen the likes of Khuxxman, Thulani Dube, Sisa and others adding their voices. “It’s unfortunate that we lost Mgcini ‘Cal Vin’ Nhliziyo before he gave us something. We had a pending project which he was supposed to do with D’lax.” D’lax (real name Walter Mcebisi Dlamini) said he composed the Vele Angizwa song because of the love he has for the football club. “Being a Highlanders FC supporter is part of my identity. It’s part of who I am. I approached the club as I wanted to commemorate our beloved team and the club gave me guidance in putting it together. “They also organised for me to use the Babourfields Stadium to shoot the music video,” the artiste said. He added that the song which was released last week, was his means of uniting Highlanders fans in Zimbabwe and different parts of the world as they impatiently wait for the football season to resume. With a career spanning five years, D’lax has worked with the likes of Ndebele dancehall king Ma9Nine and Montel on the track Ngempelaviki and Udlala Ngami featuring Nobesuthu. – @mthabisi_mthire.