The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
A RARE breed of a teenager filled with determination is a depiction of ZimStars Arts Awards founder, Tinashe Munyaradzi Mandlokuwa popularly known as Nashe. Hailing from Gweru, 19-year-old Nashe said he was inspired to come up with this initiative by his homeboys, the likes of DJ Tamuka, musicians Jah Soshea and Legion who have made names for themselves nationally in their various arts fields. To become a force to reckon with while also uplifting artistes, Nashe introduced the awards this year to recognise outstanding Zimbabwean creatives and their work in the arts and culture industry. By introducing the awards which will be held virtually this month, Nashe has made history by becoming the youngest individual in the country to do so. He follows in the footsteps of Jackson “Zimboy” Muchechetere who founded the Changamire Hip Hop Festival in his early 20s. “The awards are mainly focused on uplifting and supporting youths and creatives in Zimbabwe and those in the diaspora,” Nashe said. “I was born in Gweru on the 9th of August 2001. The early stages of my life were spent at Harben Park at our farm. Thereafter I attended Airforce Primary School from first grade up to fourth grade. “It wasn’t very easy living at the plot as there wasn’t much socialisation. I was then transferred to Lundi Park Primary School where I completed my primary schooling before going to Mkoba 1 High School for Form One. I completed my O Level studies at Fletcher High School where I passed seven subjects out of nine,” he said. Nashe said during his last days at secondary school, he set up social media pages with the name ZimStars which he wanted to use to promote up-and-coming talent little did he know that this would later birth an awards ceremony. “During my last days at school, I started growing an online audience through a platform I called ZimStars. On this platform, I promoted artistes and creatives work with the help of my brother Austin Mandlokuwa,” he said. He said he decided not to pursue A-Level studies as he wanted to pursue his dream of being a revered individual in the arts sector. Fortunately, his parents supported him. “I’d like to thank my family for believing in me and allowing me to pursue my dream. Through their support, I’ve managed to enrol for a Higher Diploma in Film and Television production course at CCA where I am in level 1.2,” he said. To make his dream a reality, Nashe said he is working with Bigsoko Music Group, Earground, Mukukuzvi, Varsity Stereo and Indie Artsy Visuals. But, things may not go the way Nashe would have loved as he is facing financial constraints and battling with the ongoing restrictions to combat Covid-19. He added that award recipients would be given appreciation tokens. Looking at the list of nominees for the award’s second edition, it seems Nashe and his team are on the right track as the list is refreshingly filled with new faces from musicians, actors, dancers, producers to online television stations. Not only does it have new names, it is also balanced as outstanding artistes from all corners of the country have been included. In the music category, notable nominees include high flying Jah Master, Asaph, Poptain, Allanah, Van Choga, Vuyo Brown, Tebza, Sikhosana, Mzoe 7 and Novuyo Seagirl. Up-and-coming hip-hop musician Boy Nino, who expressed his dismay after not getting a nomination at the Bulawayo Arts Awards is also nominated. — @mthabisi_mthire.