The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
FORMER Energy and Power Development Minister Fortune Chasi has started working on his fourth album filled with the popular Amapiano genre. Mdara Chasi or Chibabest as he is known in the music corridors, is on a mission to let people dance and be merry ahead of the festive season. In an interview with Chronicle Showbiz, Chibabest who is also Mazowe South legislator said the album will carry heart-rending messages as has been his past work. “I’m not stuck in a single genre. Whatever young people enjoy is what flows with me. I like Zimdancehall and now I’m on to Amapiano. “Genres are good and useful but I think what’s more critical is the messaging. Bad messaging gives genres a bad name,” said Chibabest. The Bulawayo-born and bred musician said his musical journey just bloomed unexpectedly and with that in mind he now wants to help empower fellow musicians back home. “I was never a singer. At Mpopoma High School I was chased from the choir. I never sang again even esontweni (at church). However, when I became idle in 2014 after being fired as Deputy Minister of Justice I decided to track Zimdancehall artistes. I found a mountain of talent in the various studios and began partnering with young artistes across Harare. “Amapiano is a great genre and in Zimbabwe, Bulawayo is the Amapiano capital and so I have decided to approach young people there. Apart from that I am from Bulawayo. I was born and grew up there. I went to Lukhanyiso Primary, Mpopoma High and Founders High. So, seen from that angle I’m following up talent at home,” he said. Chibabest said fans should anticipate the greatest from his latest work and urged Bulawayo female musicians to take heed and collaborate with him as many are reluctant. “The Amapiano album will come in time for Christmas. Sokuvuthwa! (It’s almost ready). I’m not at liberty to disclose the names (artistes am working with) as there are ongoing discussions. We are aiming at 12 tracks but the interest is overwhelming from young artistes. We need more female collaborations though. “Some of the songs are being produced here in Zimbabwe while we are also working with some producers in South Africa and Botswana,” he said. If the snippet he shared on Twitter is anything to go by, as the Amapiano track has that soothing touch and vocals, the album will be a scorcher. Chibabest has worked on albums, Life is a collaboration, Singles Compilation and Free and Fair Elections. In the past he has teamed up with urban grooves Roki, Zimdancehall artistes Guspy Warrior on a song called Life Haizi Easy, Killer T on the track Zimbabwe Ino and Soul Jah Love on Soko Mukanya. — @mthabisi_mthire.