The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
SOUTH Africa-based former World Boxing Federation (WBF) Africa heavyweight champion Elvis Moyo could be in line for more fights after joining professional boxing management and representation company Global Boxing Stars (GBS). Popularly known as ‘Bulawayo Bomber’, Moyo joins the management company owned by American promoter Sean Gibbons and Briton Scott Farrell, former chief executive officer and founder of Ringstar Management. Ringstar Management was the creator of Ringstar Asia, a sports media and entertainment company based in Singapore.
An online search established that GBS has worked with top boxing promoters such as Top Rank, PBC, Golden Boy, Manny Pacquiao Promotions and Matchroom. The GBS website states that they represent over 50 professional fighters worldwide. “GBS also works closely with the IBF, WBA, WBO and WBC to make sure our camp of talent is on the right track to success. “The client is always number one at GBS, with the main objective being to utilise their strong network and ensure clients (the boxers) reach their full potential in and out of the ring. “The GBS team ensure the best representation from a dedicated agent and advisor, who acts as an integral part of the team by booking fights, negotiating contracts and presenting opportunities for the fighter to showcase their talent to the world’s best promoters,” reads a GBS statement. Before the formation of GBS, Farrell and Gibbons worked with the “only boxing hall of fame eight division world champion Senator Manny Pacquiao” to create and promote the global Manny Pacquiao Championship Boxing. Being part of the GBS stable could unlock opportunities for Moyo, since the directors have brokered broadcast deals with multiple international networks such as Box Nation, ABS-CBN, ESPN, and SKY, among others. GBS yesterday advised Moyo to turn down a proposed December title fight with Belgium-based DR Congo boxer Jack Mulowayi Nsendula. The global boxing official record keeper boxrec.com had already advertised the vacant Africa Boxing Union (ABU) heavyweight title fight that had been billed for Kinshasa on December 19. In an interview from his Johannesburg base in South Africa yesterday, Moyo said his management told him that he needed about two non-title fights before challenging for a title. “I got a call for a title fight and to be honest it was a shock because I wasn’t thinking about that coming anytime soon. I consulted my team and after lengthy discussions, we agreed it would be better if I get two or three non-title fights before going for a big fight because of the long layoff. Remember, I haven’t fought in the past 18 months and while I feel could have taken the risk and gone for the ABU title, my team felt otherwise and I respect their input,” said Moyo. His ratings have been affected by lack of fights and he is presently ranked 144th in the world, while Nsendula, whose record stands at 8-2-1, is ranked 215. — @ZililoR