The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
THE recently launched ZimBHO! #Vakatsha campaign is gathering momentum and seems to be on the right track as various events that are attracting locals from different parts of the country are being organised. In order to encourage locals to visit various tourist destinations in the country, the Zimbabwe Tourism Authority (ZTA) last week launched the ZimBHO #Vakatsha #IzimYami campaign where they announced that tourism prices had been reduced significantly to cater for the local market. This campaign is part of efforts to revive the country’s tourism sector. Other than using events to entice locals, the country’s personalities and influencers have been leading the campaign by travelling and sharing their experiences on their social media accounts. To ensure that the campaign is a success and remains viable, ZTA recently announced that they are working closely with events companies to organise events that will bring audiences from different communities. At first, they partnered Zim Events who they worked with for the ZimBHO campaign in Kariba. Now, they have partnered Tambai Events which is preparing to host the Braai Out ZW at Zimparks’ Nyanyana camp in Kariba next month. Tambai Events director Nigel Chinovhiringa said the event dubbed “In the jungle Kariba”, is selling like hot cakes as people from different parts of the country are eager to attend. He said the event started off in Harare, but following their partnership with ZimParks and ZTA, they are now taking the concept to different tourist destinations in the country as a way to make people visit them.  “The event has been running since last year. We hosted three events in Harare and through it, we got nominated as best promoter at the Zima awards within a year of operating. Now, we’ve entered into a partnership with ZimParks and have decided to take the event to resort towns, starting with Kariba in December,” said Chinovhiringa. He said the Kariba event will kick off with a road trip starting from Bulawayo and Harare where attendants will have a stopover at Chinhoyi Caves. “We’re going to have two party buses, one starting in Harare and the other starting in Bulawayo and participants with their own cars are allowed to join the convoy. At the venue, there’ll be live music, DJs, a cinema in the jungle, game drive, Zumba and boat cruise among many other activities. “We’re very grateful to ZimParks who’ve given us all the support we need. That’s helped us in coming up with very affordable packages,” Chinovhiringa said. Other than Braai Out ZW, another interesting picnic styled event that has a similar concept, Cook Out ZW is set to take place in Nyanga from November 20 to 22. As the festive season approaches, more events are set to take place in resort towns with Zimbabweans being urged to play their part in promoting domestic tourism. – @mthabisi_mthire.