The Chronicle Leonard Ncube , Victoria Falls Reporter
CHIEF Sinamagonde of Lusulu in Binga who died last Friday has been laid to rest at his homestead amid calls for the community to unite and fulfil his vision for community development. He was 78. Born Sinyenyi Muchwayile in 1942, Chief Sinamagonde died at St Luke’s Hospital in Lupane where he had been admitted for a week after suffering a stroke. Local Government and Public Works Minister July Moyo on Wednesday described the late chief as a visionary leader who contributed to the attainment of the country’s independence. The late chief was tortured and jailed for five years at Khami, Chikurubi and Whawha prisons, according to the family. “Let’s all cherish his contribution to the liberation struggle and fulfil his vision for a better society. The Second Republic is engaging traditional leaders and the President has Binga in his heart because when he went to Zambia during the liberation war, he was accommodated by Tonga chiefs across the river. “So, if you need anything or have any issues feel free to invite him to come here or you can go to him, he is a listening President and willing to listen. Let’s be united as traditional leaders and community as a whole because we are different from politicians hence your role is different too and critical to community development,” said Minister Moyo who was accompanied by his deputy Marian Chombo. He also encouraged the Binga community to embrace the Intwasa Climate-Proofed Presidential Input Scheme so as to boost food security. Chief Sinamagonde was instrumental in construction of clinics and schools in his area as his vision was to bring social services closer to the people. Minister Moyo said Chief Siansali will help preside over cases at Chief Sinamagonde’s court until a successor is appointed. He said the royal family is the one that should identify a successor and should seek guidance from other traditional leaders and elders in the chieftaincy where necessary. The Minister said in the event of a deadlock, the family should approach the provincial Chief Council using the right channels. Matabeleland North Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Richard Moyo, who was represented by deputy director in his office Mr Tapera Mugoriya, said the community should celebrate the late chief’s life by fulfilling his vision. “Chief Sinamagonde had a vision of seeing his area develop by bringing services closer to the people. His vision can only be achieved if we respect elders and their leadership. This will also help us achieve the vision enunciated by President Mnangagwa for an upper-class economy by year 2030,” he said. Vice-president of the Chiefs’ Council Chief Mtshana Khumalo implored members of the community to work together with traditional leaders who have a role to develop the community as well as uphold values. Also present at the burial were Chief Mathuphula of Tsholotsho, Chiefs Sikalenge, Kavila, Sinasengwe Dobola and Pashu of Binga as well as Chief Shana from Hwange. The late Chief was buried by family members and community elders late afternoon after community members had been dispersed, in line with the culture of burying a Chief. Government footed funeral expenses and provided groceries, a coffin and hearse that carried the body from St Luke’s in Lupane to Lusulu. The late chief ascended to the throne in 1983 and is survived by four wives, 16 children and 71 grandchildren. — @ncubeleon