The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
THE partial reopening of the Cultural and Creative Industries (CCIs) has come as a relief for fashion designers who have since the beginning of the lockdown, been on a hiatus in terms of production. So far exhibitions at galleries and museums, book launches, film production, training centres-cum-schools of arts, arts and culture centres, visual art studios, music recording studios, drive-in cinema, studio recording for online publication and theatre houses for drama, dance, movies and spoken word have been given the green light to reopen. This has given hope to fashion designers who feel they will soon have their groove back and continue to push their brands. Most fashion designers dress personalities so the coming of the lockdown which saw everyone being holed up at their homes, forced designers to halt production. Bulawayo-based Fikile Ncube who is the founder and head designer at Empress Primy, said things are now starting to fall in place through support from his fellow citizens. The designer has dressed among other personalities, actress Mbo Mahocs, model Samantha Tshuma, Miss Tourism Global Africa Sindiso Ndlovu and Amanda Mutangadura who is the director of AM modelling agency. “During the lockdown, we were completely closed with no income coming in. We also failed to do our annual fashion show ‘The Face of Empress Primy’. Since the relaxation of the lockddown restrictions and the partial reopening of the arts sector, we’ve been able to pick up where we left off like nothing happened. Thus, we’re grateful for the support,” said Ncube. Social media, Ncube said, has played a huge role in keeping him relevant. “Being on social media platforms has assisted as I’ve gotten many clients from those platforms. I’ve managed to dress UZ students and various models from Harare and been able to reach people as far as Hwange and Victoria Falls.” With events such as the Roil Bulawayo Arts Awards soon to be held, designers in Bulawayo will likely be busy as personalities will want to be dressed for the day. Gweru-born and bred designer, Brian Ngonidzashe Motsi of the Chena Nenni brand that was founded in 2016, said the lockdown really affected his business. “We failed to do a fashion show we were planning to do and we still cannot travel outside the country to do other international fashion shows we’d hoped to stage. Since events like weddings and birthday parties which people dress up for have not been taking place, our sales have been quite low. “But I’m glad that things are slowly reopening so there’s hope.” Jasper Nyasha Mandizera, the brain behind Ivhu Tribe said with no A-list music videos being shot, no pageants being held, no high profile red carpet events to grace with show-stopping designs, the lockdown was almost catastrophic. Ivhu Tribe is known to be a favourite of Madam Boss, Mai Titi, Sebastián Magacha, Rutendo Jackie, Vimbai Zimuto, Queen Vee and Nantek among others. “My style is inspired by an assortment of complexities thus it’s almost impossible to define. At times it leans greatly to the more modern avant-garde scene and other times, it reaches back to the ancient and even medieval African styles,” said Mandizera. As the awards season is upon us, fashion designers will soon be hard at work with the red carpet on which personalities showcase their outfits, always being the highlight of awards ceremonies. -@mthabisi_mthire.