The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
THE release of R Peels (real name Tanaka Mungoyo)’s fourth album titled Muchinjiko — The Crossover has just intensified the battle of the country’s rap king. Following the death of Cal Vin who was touted by many as the king on Zimbabwe’s hip-hop, the battle of supremacy now has the likes of Asaph, Msiz’Kay and TiGonzi among many others. Leaving no stone unturned, R Peels who is leading the Zim Hip Hop Awards nominees list with eight nominations, recently upped his game by becoming one of the few artistes in his genre to drop an album. He definitely has outshone his peers as they only have singles. The 25-year-old rapper is certainly out to claim the top spot evidenced by the quality of collaborations and diversity of messages on the tracks. Artistes featured on the 18-track album are Asaph, rap Queen Kikky BadA$$, Kure hit-maker Ishan, Nutty O and Tashamiswa. The album was produced by award-winning producers DJ Tamuka, Oskid, Mclyne, Jax, SK, Scrip Mula and Boy Tricky. The tracks are Muchinjiko, Elevation, Vanondinamatira, Protection ft Asaph, I Swear, Ruchiva, Special Meat, Uripo ft Yolanda Cream, Life Yangu, Ray Vines Interlude, Mwari anoona, Thankful ft Nutty O, Verenga Ishoma ft Kikky BadA$$, Eke Remix ft Tashamiswa, New One, Eke, Biggaz and Andiroya ft Ishan. Within a month of release, some of the tracks are already getting rave reviews on national radio stations where they are being played. Most have said the artiste is poised for greater heights. Speaking from his Chitungwiza base, R Peels said he is overwhelmed by the love he is receiving with the Zim Hip Hop Awards nominations showing him that he is doing something right. “I’m overwhelmed by the positive feedback the new album is receiving. The hip-hop crowd has grown over the years and I’m glad to be among those who are liked by fans. “This is evidenced by Eke, my song which received 70 000 views in two months. Andiroya which features Ishan has 41 000 views in a month,” he said. R Peels said he decided to promote his album through releasing videos for some of the tracks so that people can get to know him better. He went on to describe his musical style as energetic and relatable. He said he has a lot to offer and is actually planning to embark on a countrywide tour once lockdown measures are eased. R Peels who started rapping at an early age said he was inspired by the likes of Lil Wayne, T.I, Jay-Z, Rick Ross, Kanye West and Drake. –@mthabisi_mthire.