The Chronicle ZIMBABWEANS are for the first time using electric vehicles on a utility and frequent basis, thanks to the revolution being driven by VAYA Africa (VAYA)’s female partners. VAYA, Zimbabwe’s largest hail riding service provider, introduced electric vehicles in May this year as part of plans to provide smart transportation and ensure a unique customer experience. “The smoothness of this electric car is amazing, and it doesn’t make noise when taking-off,” said Sandra Gwena, VAYA’s best performing electric vehicle partner, according the company. Electric vehicles are environmentally friendly as they do not emit tailpipe pollutants and are being touted as the best foot forward in reducing carbon emissions and improving the air quality of Zimbabwe’s congested cities.
Sandra, who boasts over 18 years driving experience, said she owes her success on the road to her love for adventure and an enduring passion for her job. “I am a person who loves to be adventurous and also pursue innovative ideas. When the chance to be the first electric car driver in Zimbabwe presented itself, I immediately jumped on board and have never looked back,” said the 39-year-old driver. “I do not see myself as a VAYA employee, but rather as a stakeholder in the company. And I guess I get more customers because I interact a lot with them when they are in my car. Sometimes they also ask me for advice,” Sandra said with a chuckle. Another female driver Natash Chibvute (31) said it was important for most people in the country, who are yet to experience electric cars due the perception that the vehicles are expensive, to try the new cars. “Electric vehicles are not only unique, but provide unmatched comfort to both the driver and the clients. Once you get a ride in this car you will be hooked forever,” she said. Natash, who joined VAYA in 2018 when the company started operations in Zimbabwe, said she stopped using her conventional car when she was tapped to be part of the first female drivers to use electric cars this year. “Over the past two years, I have managed to complete a house in Southlea Park where I stay with my husband and our two kids, mainly using proceeds from the business,” she added. Electric vehicles are efficient with low noise pollution. This is largely because the vehicle has one moving part, it’s motor, unlike the many parts of the internal combustion engine. When on the road, they emit minimal sound. At faster speeds though, the friction of the tires against the road and wind resistance against the windshield make the car more audible. Hope Chinya, who started driving in 2005, said electric vehicles were also flexible and easy to drive around as she doesn’t have to fuel-up all the time. An electric taxi can travel 150 kilometres on a full charge. “Most clients who use our cars usually say they want to purchase their own electric cars. That’s how good these vehicles are,” she said. The 34-year old driver added that she is planning to buy a stand and a car from the proceeds of her business. “I want to urge all people in Zimbabwe to try our electric cars. In this hot weather we give our clients a bottle of water, and lucky customers can also get a nice chocolate,” said Hope. In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, VAYA drivers also ensure their clients’ safety by sanitising their passengers’ hands and checking their body temperatures before they board the cars, in line with World Health Organisation protocols of controlling the spread of the disease. Dorothy Zimuto, VAYA Mobility’s chief executive officer, said the company will soon be introducing more electric vehicles to reduce air pollution in Zimbabwe. “The benefits of the use of e-vehicles will be zero emissions, less frequent services and fewer scheduled vehicle maintenance check-ins than ordinary combustion engines. They will require minimal scheduled maintenance for their electrical systems, such as the battery and electrical motors. Other parts such as brakes also last longer because of their regenerative braking systems, where the battery is charged when breaking.” VAYA’s electric vehicles can be charged on solar or on grid-tied electric charging stations across the country.