The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Following the successful hosting of the inaugural Girl Talk Zimbabwe in Bulawayo earlier this year, the event’s organiser has decided to host another edition. The second edition has been slated for December 6 at Banff lodge in the city. A brainchild of model, Annita Tatenda Neshiri popularly known as Annita Nesh, Girl Talk Zimbabwe is a programme designed to help girls/ women have confidence and skills through peer-to-peer mentoring (women empowerment). The debut event had discussions from Dr Siduduzo Mphoko who tackled mental health and depression issues, young talented Miss Globe Africa Jemima Mandemwa who discussed body image and Khulumani FM radio presenter Miss Tee (real name Thokozani Mkandla) who presented on relationships and sex. The second event will be hosted by Annita Nesh alongside Khulumani FM radio presenter Tracy The Duchess, chief executive officer of Kanga Poto Langa Ndlovu as well as a surprise guest. “Our event covers a wide range of topics including diversity and inclusion, body image, relationships, digital citizenship, women’s health such as cervical cancer and breast cancer awareness, fitness and we also share affairs of the female universe,” Annita Nesh said. “I believe that girl talk has the responsibility to equip girls with the right tools they need to live their best life possible. “Therefore, our goal is to educate and empower girls to become their best selves through building growth in emotional intelligence (help them to advance educationally through career guidance); improving the sense of camaraderie among girls, learn from girls and laugh with them as we chat with goal getters that inspire and raise girls’ self-esteem.” Annita Nesh said the talk show was inspired by the need to build a united community of girls while also empowering them. The event organiser, a post-graduate of Tourism and hospitality management, is also a director at Young Women in Business Zimbabwe. — @mthabisi_mthire.