The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Acting Sports Editor
THERE has been an emotional cry from members of the Southern Region Zimbabwe National Soccer Supporters Association who feel that Zifa has perpetually been neglecting them on national team travels yet prioritising few and selected members based in Harare. The restructured and ever loyal supporters chapter have been using their own resources especially on regional Warriors tours where those that are seemingly ‘Zifa favourites’ when it comes to far away matches and tournaments,’ have not been present. The vocal supporters, who followed the national team to Zambia, Lesotho and Malawi want Zifa to support them and also afford them the opportunity to accompany the national teams as what it is doing to Harare based supporters. “Look, we are all passionate fans of the Warriors, no one is better than the other regardless of where one is resident. We have been using our own resources to follow our national team and we don’t want anyone to feel emotionally inclined to feel that we have to be reimbursed, no, we are passionate football fans. Even when FC Platinum play in the Caf Champions League, we fully rally behind them because they will be representing the nation. It is sad that when it comes to assignments where we can’t drive, one or two, if not more supporters are chosen to accompany the national team and they will be going on Zifa account. It might not be all of us going but as fans from Bulawayo, we feel we are not given the same respect and honour as those from Harare,” said the vice secretary general of the Zimbabwe National Soccer Supporters Association Southern Region, Trust Jim. He said all that Zifa must do was to accept that the national team was not a Harare project but was instead a national one, including the selection of players. “National team representation, we believe, is on merit not on where one is coming from, this is why at one time we had a number of Highlanders players in the national team during the Dream Team era and we therefore frown when we see boys from this part of the country being ignored, especially those who are local. We are not coaches by the way, maybe they know what they want from the players called up but we get shocked when an unattached player finds his way into the national team,” said Jim. Warriors coach Zdravko Logarusic last week called clubless Ovidy Karuru to the Warriors squad for the upcoming Caf African Nations Cup qualifier against Algeria this week. It’s a crucial match for the Warriors.