The Chronicle Eddie Chikamhi, Harare Bureau
WARRIORS captain Knowledge Musona says his troops have learnt from their mistakes and are prepared to turn the tables when they meet old foes Algeria in the return leg of the 2021 Afcon qualifiers at the National Sports Stadium this afternoon. Kick-off is 3pm. Supporters will not be allowed into the stadium, in accordance with Caf guidelines on Covid-19 prevention. Zifa, however, have made arrangements for a live broadcast on ZBC TV. Zimbabwe will go into the match on the back of a disappointing 1-3 defeat in the first leg played in Algiers four days ago. Apart from the lacklustre preparations, the Warriors were largely criticised for contributing to the loss after making a series of mistakes that gifted their opponents with the goals and the failure to convert their own scoring opportunities. The defeat was a huge dent to Zimbabwe’s campaign. And Musona, who appeared in cheerful spirits after the team’s final training session at the match venue yesterday, believes they have done their homework. “The team is ready; we have been training very hard trying to correct the mistakes that we made in Algeria. I think the guys have learnt their lesson and the only thing we need to do is to try and correct where we went wrong and to try to convert our scoring chances. I think it will be a very good game and we are ready. “As you can see everyone is smiling and the morale is high. I believe it’s a sign that everyone is ready to fight tomorrow (today) and to give his best. So we can’t wait to play the game and give something to the nation,” said Musona. Many of the Zimbabwean players were confident too. But its not going to be a stroll in the park considering the stature of the opponents. The Desert Foxes scored their goals courtesy of Baghdad Bounedjah, Sofiane Feghouli, and Riyad Mahrez. Tinotenda Kadewere pulled one back for the Warriors. The Algerians, who won the previous Afcon edition held in Egypt, remain favourites on paper after extending their unbeaten run in all competitions to 21 games. The reigning African champions boast of a 100% record and nine points in the bag in Group H having beaten Zambia and Botswana in previous qualifiers. They also handed Zdravko Logarusic’s Warriors their first defeat. Zimbabwe had begun the campaign with a goalless draw against Botswana before edging Zambia 2-1 at their own backyard. They are second in the group with four points. And as they brace for another test against the Algerians, Musona reckons they cannot continue dropping points. “These are qualifiers where teams qualify on points. So since match day one it was very important that in every game we give our best and try to collect maximum points. “It’s been the same from day one and it’s going to be the same tomorrow (today) until the last match. We are going to put the same importance on each game.” However, another defeat today could see Zimbabwe slipping down on the group standings, in the event that nearest rivals Zambia beat Botswana today. Zambia moved into third position following last week’s 2-1 win over the Zebras which earned them their first set of points. “Of course, anything can happen in football but we don’t depend on other teams. We play for ourselves. We want to earn our own points to qualify. We don’t have to look at the other teams and expect favours. “I think it’s best we do the job for ourselves. The first thing is to focus on the match day that is coming and forget about the other teams. “We have to do our best to take maximum points and then we will see about the results of the other games. But it’s not finished yet because after this we have to play two more games with nine points at the stake. “It’s unfortunate that we are playing in an empty stadium. We have to play; we cannot change anything. It’s not anyone’s fault so we just have to try and win to play our best. “I know they (supporters) will be supporting us from home. They will be watching on television so we need to play hard and try to win and make them happy,” said Musona. Logarusic, who has also come under the spotlight, said Zimbabwe are not prepared to walk empty handed in this qualifier. The Croat is expected to make a few tactical changes to match the Algerians. Zimbabwe need a way to stop the fluid Algerians and they also need to find a way of scoring at home to secure the points. Talbert Shumba is expected to make a rare start in goals for the Warriors replacing Elvis Chipezeze who twisted his knee in Algeria last week. Chipezeze, who was blamed for Algeria’s opener, underwent MRI scans on Saturday and the doctors said he may need up to two weeks to recover. The technical team have roped in FC Platinum’s Petros Mhari for cover. Logarusic has been drilling on his players the psychological support they need to recover from last week’s setback. “We are Warriors; why should we be scared of anything? We created three-four chances in Algeria but we conceded goals that we shouldn’t be conceding in these types of games. “Some of the goals were more like gift goals and we have to cut those mistakes. We don’t have to give away goals like that. If they are to score (today) they have to work hard for that. “We are going into this game to win. They (Algeria) haven’t lost in a long time but they will lose tomorrow (today). That’s our main target. “We have to pick up three points. There is no reason why we shouldn’t aim for that at home,” said Loga. Algeria will be pushing to seal an early qualification to the 2021 Afcon edition and they are upbeat following a fantastic 21-match unbeaten run. The Desert Foxes are sitting on nine points and they need just a point this afternoon to make it a reality. Two top teams from the group will get the tickets to participate at the finals. “And aside from qualification, Algeria coach Djamel Belmadi said that one of his side’s main goals is to break Egypt’s record for the longest unbeaten run in Africa. The Pharaohs went 24 games without a defeat at the start of the century. “Our players are keen on breaking the record for the team with the longest unbeaten run in African matches, currently held by the Egyptians. “Small things like this hold a lot of meaning even if it’s not our biggest ambition. For me, reaching the 2022 World Cup finals is my main goal and we want to participate at all costs and there’s also the upcoming Afcon. “The players love challenges and they want to go to distance. Winning the 2019 Afcon wasn’t enough,” said Belmadi. The Desert Foxes arrived in Zimbabwe on Friday and yesterday they conducted their final training session at the match venue in the afternoon.