The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
OLYMPIAN Cuthbert Nyasango has applauded the National Athletics Association of Zimbabwe (Naaz) for amending its constitution to include athletes in its structures. The amendment sees the Athletes Commission (AC) that is led by Nyasango getting a seat at the athletics’ decision-making table. Speaking at the sidelines of the elective congress which drew participants from the country’s 10 provinces, Naaz president Tendai Tagara who was elected unopposed in Gweru on Saturday said the coming in of the AC is in line with World Athletics stance of involving athletes in decision making. “This is a milestone for athletics because all along athletes have been coming in as observers but this time around they will be involved in voting and decision making. This is the case with World Athletics, athletes are represented at decision making level, and we are only but aligning our constitution alongside to that of the international organisation,” said Tagara. Nyasango said the development is a blessing for athletes and shows Naaz’s commitment to bettering athletes’ lives. “As athletes we are happy to be involved in leadership because all along we’ve only been watching while key decisions were made for us. In the last two or so Naaz terms, we’ve seen great improvement in involving athletes in decision making processes. The Naaz management, even though we didn’t have voting powers, regularly consulted us. They showed that they value athletes and this decision to amend the constitution is testament that they value us,” said Nyasango. The revered athlete also praised Government for releasing Covid-19 relief funds to athletes. “Athletes were hit hard by Covid-19 and we appreciate the support we got from Government through Naaz. Some athletes have already received the relief funds while some are waiting for them. We hope they come soon so that athletes have something to back them when they do training and travel to events centres which we hope will happen soon,” he said. Meanwhile, three new faces were elected into Naaz’s leadership. Just like Tagara, Matabeleland North’s Enock Ngwenya got the treasurer’s post uncontested and takes over from Salatial Zangure. Elections were tightly contested for the positions of first and second vice-president’s as well as that of the secretary-general. Enias Nhoro lost his first vice-president seat to Masvingo’s Titus Madzingo who polled 11 votes while the former got 9. Bulawayo’s Christine Ncube failed to retain her second vice-president’s position that was contested by three candidates. Siphathisiwe Machaya of Mashonaland West is the association’s second vice-president after amassing 10 votes, two more than Pretty Maware. Cynthia Phiri of Midlands retained the secretary-general post, beating Maware 12-11. Nhoro, a long-serving member wished the newly elected officials the best. “Thank you for the support you gave me during my tenure. We had a number of development programmes that we ran together and were a success because of everyone’s support. As I leave office, my wish is for the association to go strong and prosper under the leadership that has been elected. Let’s continue working as a team to achieve desired results,” Nhoro said. Zangure, who held the treasurer’s position for almost two decades said: “Finally I get to rest. I served the association with honour and dignity. I’ve no doubt that those coming in will take the association to greater heights. I’ll continue availing myself for consultancy, should my advice be needed.” The newly elected board will be in office till 2024. -@ZililoR