The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda
Senior Reporter
INYATHI residents in Bubi District have, through their lawyers, written to Bubi Rural District Council chairperson Cllr Cookie Moyo demanding information on allegations of office abuse by the council’s chief executive officer, Mr Partson Mlilo. Mr Mlilo is being accused of abusing his office by clandestinely buying a council truck in 2013 at an auction through a third-party and using fake papers to register it in his name.
The alleged scam emerged when the aggrieved party, Mr Khanyiso Khabo, purporting to have bought the car from the council seven years ago, discovered that it was registered under Mr Mlilo without his knowledge. Mr Khabo is accusing Mr Mlilo of using unorthodox means to change ownership of the car and registering it under his name by using a copy of an affidavit containing his fake signature. Messrs Gifford Mehluli Sibanda and Thembani Khumalo, through their lawyers, TJ Mabhikwa and Partners, wrote to Cllr Moyo, the council chairperson, demanding to be furnished with information on how Mr Mlilo acquired the council vehicle, a white 1997 model Mazda B1800. The letter was copied to Local Government and Public Works Minister July Moyo, Matabeleland North Provincial Affairs Minister Richard Moyo, Provincial Development Coordinator for Matabeleland North and council chairpersons for finance and human resources committees and Mr Mlilo. “Our clients as residents of Inyathi with substantial and real interest to the affairs and issues of Bubi RDC, have engaged us. They instructed us to intercede in the matter and request for information and necessary documentation (if any), which could have led to Mr Partson Mlilo taking control and possession of council property as his personal,” read part of the letter. “Our clients have indicated that they suspect either abuse of council property and/or criminal conduct by Mr Mlilo, which suspicions could be cleared with provision of such information and documentation. We believe our clients have a right to access this information as provided in section 62 (1) of the Constitution of Zimbabwe (Amendment No. 20), that is held by council as it is required in the interests of public accountability.” According to the letter, the council chairperson should respond within seven days of receiving it failure of which appropriate legal action would be taken to access the information.
In his affidavit, Mr Khabo and Mr Mlilo entered into an agreement in which the former purportedly sold a white 1997 model Mazda B1800 (registration number AAB5845) to the latter, after buying it from Bubi RDC auction sale. Mlilo is also being accused of a series of irregularities which include allegedly buying himself an official vehicle, a Toyota D4D pick up from Umguza Rural District Council without going through the tender processes. — @mashnets