The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
THE Zimbabwe Revenue Authority (Zimra) was by end of the day yesterday yet to fully implement the newly-introduced pre-clearance system for all vehicle imports and goods imported by road. This followed representations made by Transit Shed Operators who requested an additional two weeks before the new order takes effect. Vehicles being imported via Beitbridge in car carriers are processed at the Manica, Malindi, and Beitbridge Transit Sheds respectively. An average of 200 vehicles, mainly second-hand, are imported from South Africa through Beitbridge daily, with each paying an average import duty of US$2 500. Very few car carriers were allowed passage into Zimbabwe yesterday. According to sources who attended a meeting between Zimra and the Transit Shed Operators, the latter asked for more time to engage vehicle suppliers and to accommodate those that had purchased the vehicles pending delivery before the announcement of the new regulations. “They also indicated that Zimra was haste to announce the new regulations without educating car dealers and the ordinary Zimbabweans on the exact import procedures. “Discussions also centred on the fate of those pre-owned vehicles kept at car dealerships in bond,” said a border official. The source added that the dealers noted that there should be a clear position considering that some cars may be bought towards the end of the bond. It is understood that such vehicles’ transportation to Zimbabwe might be delayed by border processes on both sides and the buyer ends up losing them to destruction by SARS or auctions. Under the facility, customs import procedures are completed before the traveller or import arrives at the selected port of entry. Upon arrival, the goods are only checked for conformity and this reduces the time spent by importers at the country’s borders. This is different from the existing system whereby the processing of customs documents is done by a traveller or importer upon reaching the port of entry. Zimra announced the latest development in a public notice on Sunday. The Shipping and Forwarding Agents Association of Zimbabwe (SFAAZ), chief executive officer, Mr Joseph Musariri said the latest move by the revenue collector was a step in the right direction. “The move is generally welcome. There have been prior training of clearing agents on this one. “Hopefully the security around motor vehicle importation will be tightened. Our hope is that the new measures will not congest the system and slow down the process,” he said. Zimra said in a public notice on Sunday that failure to comply with new regulations would amount to an offence. “Under the new system, importers or their appointed agents are expected to submit online scanned copies of invoices, bill of lading, export documents, proof of payment, freight statement, and copy of passport, police clearance and a letter of rebate where applicable. In addition, they should also send any other relevant documents relating to the import to enable customs officers to calculate values and advise them of the customs duty payable,” said the revenue collector. Zimra said where duties were exempt because of the non-duty paying regimes such as rebate, the necessary processes would be done and the importer would be advised. Motor vehicles, it said can only be loaded onto carriers or driven into the country when the relevant processes have been completed, including the payment of duties, where applicable. “Clearance details must be sent to the carrier to enable them to load vehicles. Please take note that carriers have been notified of this requirement,’’ it said. All imported vehicles would be subjected to compliance checks before the customs clearance certificate is processed and issued.