The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
MORE than 2 000 people have benefited from a free eye treatment programme that has been running in Kwekwe since Monday last week. Two specialist doctors mobilised by aspiring Kwekwe Central legislator, Cde Energy Ncube treated people with various eye problems from all over the mining town and some from as far as Kadoma and Gokwe. More than 200 people received spectacles free of charge. At least 120 people with special conditions that require special treatment were referred to Norton or other specialist doctors with all expenses being met by Ncube. Beneficiaries expressed gratitude saying they were suffering in silence as they could not afford medical care. “I have been facing eyesight problems for close to a decade now, I could not get treated because I cannot afford the money they wanted. Just for consultation the doctors wanted US$20 which I cannot afford. But I am grateful for this programme as I have now received spectacles that I was failing to purchase,” said Mrs Tsitsi Chitsa from Amaveni. She said she could now read, something she had been struggling to do with failing eyesight. Another beneficiary, Mr Thembelani Ncube said he had travelled all the way from Kadoma for the programme. “I heard about the programme when I was in Kadoma where I stay. I first came on Saturday but could not get the chance to see the doctors, but today I received treatment. I always thought that I needed spectacles but I was wrong. I was checked and was given medication. They however, referred me to Norton where they say I should be treated all expenses being catered for,” said a visibly ecstatic Mr Ncube. In an interview, Cde Ncube said the move was meant to help Kwekwe residents restore their eyesight. “Many people came to my office looking for assistance to get their eyes checked, that is when it struck me that many people were facing eyesight challenges. I then decided to roll out the programme so that people get their eyes checked for free. So, I talked to the doctors and they agreed to come,” said Cde Ncube. He said the programme might be prolonged as long as more people keep coming. “Our plan was to end the programme on Tuesday, but it will depend on the turnout. If they keep coming, we might increase the number of days,” he said. Cde Ncube is set to battle it out with yet another philanthropist and clergyman, Cde Kandros Ncube in a primary election set to elect a candidate to represent the ruling Zanu-PF party in the by-election. The primaries were prematurely suspended early October after violence broke out. Kwekwe Central fell vacant following the death of Masango Matambanadzo of the National Patriotic Front.