The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo in MAPUTO, Mozambique VETERAN FC Platinum shot stopper Petros Mhari has declared total war on hosts Costa do Sol when the two sides collide in a Caf Champions League preliminary round first-leg encounter at Zimpeto Stadium this afternoon. The match will be handled by experienced Botswana referee Keabetswe Dintwa and kicks off at 3.30pm local time. Speaking in a brief interview before the team’s training session at the match venue yesterday, the 2016 Castle Lager Goalkeeper of the Year said everyone in camp was aware of what was expected and they were eager to achieve it. He said a win was not negotiable to make their work in the return leg on December 5 easier, although they have to guard against complacency. Pure Platinum Play are now under the tutelage of returning coach Norman Mapeza, whose coaching shrewdness is gaining recognition, not only in Zimbabwe, but even beyond the country’s borders. “Soldiers know what should be done when their territory is under threat. It’s war and every one of us here knows what to do. We have been in this situation before and what we need is just to win this first-leg; it’s not negotiable,” said Mhari. “In terms of pressure, personally I have none and all my focus is on playing my part to ensure the team achieves what we want, which, like I said, is a non-negotiable win. We have tasted this cake (group stage participation) and know how sweet it is. We remain eager to eat it, not just to taste it,” said the goalkeeper nicknamed Budro. An aggregate win for the Zvishavane-based platinum miners will see them set a date with either Plateau United of Nigeria or Simba SC of Tanzania in the first and final round before the lucrative group stages. FC Platinum have made it into the group stages in the last two editions of the Champions League, but are yet to qualify for the knockout stages, let alone get a win. They have, however, produced some magical moments in the qualifying rounds, never giving up even when seemingly down and out. Mhari also revealed that every player was happy when they were informed about the return of Mapeza for a second stint in charge of the FC Platinum dugout following the axing of Dutchman Pieter de Jongh. De Jongh was relieved of his duties by the Zvishavane side after Caf announced that no foreign coach would be allowed to sit on the bench during inter-club matches without a Caf Pro Licence coaching badge. De Jongh, who has called a press conference at a Bulawayo lodge this afternoon to address the issue, is a holder of a Uefa A coaching badge. “Every player was happy to hear that coach Norman is back, so it’s now up to the players to work hard and fight for places because that is the coach’s policy. No one has a guaranteed start in his team,” said Mhari in a hint that the players were unhappy with de Jongh’s approach.