The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter ZIMBABWEAN runners interested in competing in the 2020 Econet Victoria Falls Virtual Marathon can now pay in local currency through the mobile payment platform Ecocash. Registration for the 7.5km fun run, 21km (10.5km x 2) two-person relay, 21.1km half marathon and 42.2km full marathon on December 13 is currently underway. To enter the two-person relay race, one participant should register online, fill in both runners’ details and then pay for the two runners simultaneously. The two runners can run together or separately, even in different countries, but the results will be combined for one finish time. Runners will be able to participate in the marathon by simply registering and running in any country in the world.
Organisers had set at a flat registration fee of R120 or US$6 for all races, but have now decided to cater for the local majority by availing the virtual marathon payment on Ecocash. Payment for locals is $650 on Ecocash. Interested participants have to complete an online registration form and pay via the mobile platform and then they will access an “interactive real-time tracking software currently available to runners” from renowned race tracker app SportSplits. Those that register for the competition can start using the tracking system during their preparations for the event.
When using the app, one must ensure they have enough data and battery power. Participants have been urged to use the app in practice runs to find a route that best suits them and to also test the battery life of their phones and amount of data their phones are likely to use in their chosen race. The annual event was reduced to a virtual marathon this year due to movement restrictions enforced by the Covid-19 pandemic outbreak. The popular event draws thousands of local and international runners and fitness enthusiasts, and traditionally takes place in the first week of July, but was postponed to December 13 following national lockdowns around the world as governments battled to contain the outbreak. – @ZililoR