The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
HIGHLANDERS Supporters South Africa Chapter chairman Nodumo Nyathi yesterday made an impassioned plea to Bosso followers to unite and contribute towards extinguishing the club’s legacy debt. Nyathi, who is spearheading a crowd-funding campaign to clear the debt of $862 868, also revealed that they had roped in popular musicians, who include Europe-based Vusa Mkhaya, Martin Sibanda of Ndolwane Super Sounds and Madlela Skhobokhobo to assist in magnifying Bosso debt clearance campaign. Nyathi clarified that the campaign is not only for South African-based members, but open to all Bosso followers and sympathisers. After last month’s first installment of $100 000 was presented to the club, some people who contributed took offence after Highlanders treasurer Donald Ndebele attributed the contribution to South African Chapter, yet the money was raised by Bosso supporters dotted around the world. Nyathi said they will not be deterred by trivial matters, adding that their sole objective is to save Highlanders and create a debt free club. “I started the debt clearance campaign as SA Supporters Chapter chairman with support from SA Chapter and took it to the Highlanders FC sons and daughters all over the world. This is what has given birth to the Highlanders FC Debt Clearance Campaign group targeting members who share the vision of a debt free Bosso,” said Nyathi. “The thing is there are people who are just focused on spewing negativity, even though they haven’t put anything. From the day I started this initiative, many people in WhatsApp groups spoke badly about me and the initiative, but I’m focused on making sure Bosso is debt free. It’s a fact that I started this with the SA Supporters Chapter, but have been clear that we need this to be a worldwide initiative and it is now a worldwide initiative.” He thanked those that contributed to the initiative and pleaded for unity of purpose, saying this wasn’t about individualism. At the beginning of May, the club’s South African chapter rolled out a crowdfunding initiative targeting at least 1 000 Bosso fans to make a once-off R500 contribution to pay off Bosso’s debt. “A video featuring prominent artistes has been produced to market the fundraising initiative. Our hope is that their popularity will influence more Highlanders followers to be part of this humble initiative,” Nyathi said. — @ZililoR