The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
BULAWAYO rap king Asaph alongside comedian Long John and Jah Prayzah are some of the artistes who will be launching the Unicef Internet of Good Things (IoGT) initiative tomorrow.
IoGT is a Unicef-led initiative that aims to bridge the digital divide and build knowledge in societies with the artistes set to lead the pack in discussing issues to do with maternal health, hygiene, emergency information on diseases such as yellow fever, polio and cholera, HIV and internet safety among others. Other artistes set to provide entertainment during the launch that will be streamed live on the UNICEF Zim and Econet Facebook pages from 8pm on Friday are Nutty O, Gemma Griffiths and Tammy Moyo. Radio personalities, MisRed and Themba Mkanda will be the hosts. Speaking ahead of the launch, Asaph encouraged fans to log in saying they should expect a top-drawer performance from him which will comfort them in these devastating times. “Throughout the performance, my fans should expect fireworks as I’ll give them a little bit of positivity for the tough times that we’re faced with,” said Asaph who is set to perform from home.
Jah Prayzah also said fans should expect a polished act. “The launch is about showing the importance of the Internet and the pandemic has made that known. To show the importance of the Internet, I’ll entertain fans with old songs and some from the new Hokoyo album online,” said Jah Prayzah who recently launched his album on the Internet. IoGT is a UNICEF-led initiative that aims to educate individuals about various issues. It hosts mobile-packaged content designed to make life-saving and life-improving information available for free, even on low-end devices. “IoGT is helping communities and frontline workers access educational and lifesaving information at the point of care. Topics and issues on IoGT include maternal health, hygiene, emergency information on diseases such as yellow fever, polio and cholera, HIV and sexual health advice for adolescents, internet safety, positive parenting techniques and more,” Unicef said in a statement. To date, more than 30 million users have accessed IoGT since launch in 2015. – @mthabisi_mthire.