The Chronicle NEMANJA MATIC wrote an open letter to defend Novak Djokovic following criticism the tennis World No1 received for hosting a tournament amid the coronavirus pandemic. Djokovic came under scrutiny for ignoring strict social-distancing rules and even dancing topless in a nightclub as he took part and helped put together the Adria Tour. But it descended into chaos after the Serbian ace, his wife Jelena and fellow players Grigor Dimitrov, Viktor Troicki and Borna Coric have all tested positive for Covid-19. Even NBA star Nikola Jokic revealed he tested positive for coronavirus — just days after embracing Djokovic at a basketball match. Despite issuing a grovelling apology, Manchester United midfielder Matic publicly defended his countrymen as he blasted “mice” who criticised Djokovic for “no reason”. Matic, 31, wrote: “See that in the last few days, there has been a campaign against Novak Djokovic for organising a tournament in Belgrade, although according to the laws of the state of Serbia, everything was in order and it was organised at a high level. “Despite that, the mice have come out of their holes giving themselves the right to criticise the world number one, both in terms of tennis, but also in his attitude toward all the people in the world. “However, I’m not worried. Very soon the cat will be on the court, and the mice back in the hole. “The tournament was great and I hope it will become traditional, because our tennis deserves it. “The only thing I hold against Novak is that he apologised to the mice who criticised him for no reason. “They will be apologising to you — soon.” Anti-Vaxxer Djokovic was slammed by Australian Nick Kyrgios as well as Brit pair Andy Murray and Dan Evans for hosting the exhibition tournament. Amazingly, a few weeks ago, Djokovic cast doubt on whether he would travel to New York in August to take part in the US Open given their strict rules on entourage sizes for players. The 33-year-old, who spent most of lockdown with his family in Spain, said he “wouldn’t want to be forced by someone to take a vaccine in order to be able to travel”. He said participating at Flushing Meadows would be an impossible task due to the “extreme” health and safety protocols in place to kick-start the Grand Slam circuit.