The Chronicle The case of 22 members of two families in Lupane, Matabeleland North province who have been quarantined because of two reckless relatives, should be a warning to other communities harbouring border jumpers and quarantine centres escapees. The Sibanda and Ngwenya family members have been quarantined after two relatives that illegally returned into the country from South Africa tested positive. Members of the two families exposed themselves to the risk of contracting Covid-19 by accepting the illegal returnees. Government has repeatedly warned communities against harbouring border jumpers and those escaping from quarantine centres as doing so exposes the communities to the risk of contracting the pandemic. An alert individual reported the illegal Lupane returnees to authorities who then took them to the quarantine centre where they tested positive. The authorities then quarantined members of the two families who were harbouring the illegal returnees while awaiting Covid-19 tests. The two families did not only expose themselves to the pandemic but also committed a crime under the Covid-19 regulations which makes it an offence to harbour border jumpers or quarantine centres escapees. Members of the two families are now going to be tested after eight days which means they are going to spend eight days or more at the quarantine centre just because of their reckless relatives. The two families also ignored Government warning not to accept illegal returnees before screening. Communities should appreciate that they have an important role to play in curbing the spread of the pandemic hence should take all measures to minimise the risk to exposure to the virus. Individuals confirmed to have contracted Covid-19 and those showing signs and symptoms of the disease are supposed to be quarantined. The two illegal Lupane returnees could have been isolated had they followed the required procedures of returning residents and this could not have affected their families who have now been inconvenienced by being quarantined and some members might have contracted the virus. We want at this juncture to implore the Health Ministry to step up awareness campaigns especially regarding the dangers of harbouring illegal returnees and those escaping from quarantine centres. Members of the community on their part should not allow individuals to put their lives at risk and should therefore not hesitate to report the illegal returnees or quarantine centres escapees to their local leaders or the police. We want to commend the Lupane whistleblower and urge other citizens to be equally alert in order to protect themselves from reckless individuals.