The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
AFRO-POP musician Mzoe 7 is working on his debut album titled United Country Africa, which is set to be released before the end of the year. Having ventured into the music business over seven years back, Mzoe 7 (real name Mzoebanzi Paul Mlauzi) has over 15 singles with Kwasa Kwasa, which he released in 2014, having put him on the map. The ongoing lockdown, Mzoe 7 said, has motivated him to finally drop his debut album, which he wants to reflect on his musical journey with. “I’ve started working on new music. The lockdown may just have been a blessing in disguise for me because there’s more inspiration through more appreciation of my art by the public. “The album I’m working on is mainly about black people’s pride, Ubuntu and unity hence its name. To strengthen the album, it will be coming with visuals,” Mzoe 7 said. Known for his top-drawer live performances, Mzoe 7 left the audience in awe when he sampled three songs, Quotation, Asambeni and Burkina Faso from the forthcoming album during the Credisi virtual concert that was held last Friday. The musician from Entumbane said the forthcoming album will have an Afro-centric fusion with dance and soul music. To hype people up, he said he will start releasing some of the singles in August. He said he is working with producer Hitkid and a band comprising Vuyi a saxophonist, Shekinah the lead guitarist and Tumelo on drums and percussion. On singing with a full band, Mzoe 7 who has shared the stage with the likes of Wizkid, Busy Signal, AKA, Micasa and Samthing Soweto said he adopted that style from the virtual concerts where more and more artistes are performing with live bands. “The online shows have seen the birth of live bands and that’s why the album has a different approach to it. I’m giving it a whole different touch and I hope people will like it,” he said. Reflecting on his music journey, Mzoe 7 said he will always be indebted to Kwasa Kwasa, a track which elevated him. “Kwasa Kwasa is the song that made me known and grow in this industry. It’s one song that always feels new to people when I perform it as it gives them life,” he said. His music has also introduced him to the world of film as he has featured on productions which include Ezakomatshelela. — @mthabisi_mthire