The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
EIGHTEEN candidates, among them, ZBC Montrose Studios’ acting head Dr Omphile Marupi and Bulawayo lawyers Mr Tanaka Muganyi and Mr Kholwani Ngwenya, have been shortlisted to attend public interviews to fill the eight posts of members of the Zimbabwe Media Commission (ZMC). Included on the shortlist is former MDC legislator Ms Jessie Majome, AB Communications chief executive officer Ms Susan Makore, ZBC reporter Mqhele Tshuma, Christian College of Southern Africa (CCOSA) principal Mr Tichaona Zinhumwe and University of Zimbabwe (UZ) senior lecturer Professor Ruby Magosongwe. The shortlisted candidates to serve on the ZMC were nominated out of a total of 38 and they will attend interviews on Friday in the Senate Chamber at Parliament Building. In terms of the Constitution, members of ZMC must be chosen for their integrity and competence in administration, their knowledge and understanding of human rights issues and the best practices in media matters. In a statement, the Parliament of Zimbabwe said due to Covid-19 regulations, members of the public wishing to witness the interviews will be limited to a small number. However, members of the public can follow proceedings through social media platforms such as ZOOM, Twitter and Facebook livestreaming. The interviewees are required to wear face masks and expected to adhere to all Covid-19 protocols as directed by the Ministry and Child Care. “The Committee on Standing Rules and Orders (CSRO) is mandated, in terms of sections 237 and 248 of the Constitution, to select suitable candidates for appointment by His Excellency, the President, to serve on the Zimbabwe Media Commission. There are eight vacancies in the Commission,” read the statement. Nominations closed on February 28 and the interviews could not be held earlier due to the Covid-19 national lockdown. “The CSRO met on Wednesday, 17th June 2020 and carried out an exhaustive analysis of the nominated candidates to decipher their suitability for consideration to serve on this commission. The following 18 out of the 38 nominated candidates were shortlisted for interviews to be held on Friday, 3rd July 2020 in the Senate Chamber at Parliament Building, corner Third Street and Kwame Nkrumah Avenue, Harare,” read the statement. Other shortlisted candidates are Dr Phillip Pasirayi, Messrs Tatenda Chiweshe, Nketa Mangoye-Dhlamini, Jasper Maphosa, Aleck Ncube, Alois Neza-Sikuka, Rtd Major Edward Mbewe, Ms Florence Ziyera, Ms Dumisani Mashingaidze and Mrs Mandida Gusha.
@mashnets