The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission (Zacc) will investigate possible embezzlement and looting of State resources during renovations of White City Stadium in 2014. The renovations were done ahead of the 2014 African Union Sports Council Region 5 Under-20 Youth Games that were held in Bulawayo. The stadium underwent massive refurbishment that saw a state-of-the-art electronic timing system, a VIP area, a giant monitor being installed, while the 400-metre athletics track was supposed have a tartan surface laid, but only 100m of the track was covered. The official position was that the contractor missed the deadline, but still nothing was done after the Games. Zacc, however, is not buying the excuse and yesterday told Chronicle Sport that it will be conducting investigations and called on anyone with any evidence that may assist in the investigations to come forward. “Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission will investigate the issue. I would like to urge whistleblowers to come forward with any evidence that they have to assist in our investigations,” said Zacc spokesperson John Makamure. He assured whistleblowers that their protection against any possible victimisation is guaranteed. “Zacc will guarantee them (whistle blowers) maximum protection from any possible victimisation,” said Makamure. As a result of the incomplete athletics track, the National Athletics Association of Zimbabwe (Naaz) this week condemned the stadium and said it will not be possible for World Athletics to certify its track although the track was standard. Besides White City Stadium shortcomings, Zacc is also going to cast its investigations wider, as a number of allegations pertaining to the Ausc Games were raised, with some claims that some senior officials in the local organising committee, the ministries of Local Government and Public Works as well as Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation looted a lot of resources meant for the Games. “Simple things like T-shirts found their way into some of those guys’ farms. Their farm employees got unexpected presents so you can just imagine what they did when it came to procurement,” said one of the Games’ volunteers.