The Chronicle Members of Parliament are elected to the august House to represent the interests of the people and will therefore be shortchanging the people if they bunk parliamentary meetings. Reports that some MPs are not attending parliamentary committee sittings are therefore very disturbing. The Speaker of the National Assembly Advocate Jacob Mudenda said at the weekend that some MPs have not attended a single committee sitting, which is very shocking. Adv Mudenda said Parliament will soon name and shame the truant MPs. We totally support the move which will not only expose the MPs to the electorate but will also assist the people to make informed decisions come next elections. Adv Mudenda said some MPs had not attended a single session of parliamentary committee hearings out of the 28 that were conducted. The Speaker reminded the MPs that their powers were derived from the people and could be taken any time by the citizenry if they fail to perform. There is absolutely no reason why the electorate should retain MPs who have decided not to perform their parliamentary duties despite making an undertaking to represent the people. “You have got to be ashamed of yourselves because you are not performing up to the expectations of the electorate nor to your oath of office,” said Adv Mudenda. He said as part of corrective action, Parliament will also compile a list of truant MPs and submit it to their respective political parties so that the parties can discipline them. Commenting on the same issue President of the Senate Mabel Chinomona said MPs should remember that they were chosen by the people not for self-enrichment but to stand for the hopes and aspirations of the people who elected them. “It is sad to note that a committee will refuse to participate in an activity that will improve the lives of the people simply because there are no allowances for the members,” she said. Adv Mudenda also complained about ministries that were failing to submit financial reports to Parliament in violation of the Constitution and standing rules and orders of the legislative assembly. He said during the 2019 fiscal year, only 15 percent of ministries furnished portfolio committees with their quarterly reports while very few monthly and annual reports were tabled. Parliament should go beyond just censoring defaulting ministries because people are demanding transparency and accountability in the use of public resources. In the event of getting no joy from the respective ministers, the Speaker should engage the President Cde Mnangagwa because these defaulting ministries might be having something to hide. We want at this juncture to implore MPs and Government Ministers to ensure they deliver to the people’s expectations because they have a mandate to work for the people.