The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
BEITBRIDGE residents have raised concern over the mushrooming of illegal settlements along the Limpopo River where criminal activities mostly border jumping and smuggling are rife. They said the situation is a time bomb that is impacting negatively on ongoing efforts by Government to combat Covid-19. It is understood that dealers have put up structures along the river to facilitate illegal activities. Speaking during an all stakeholders meeting organized by the Zimbabwe Christian Alliance, community leaders said the level of noncompliance with Covid-19 regulations in the district was alarming. A representative of the local residents association, Mr Mlaleli Ndlovu said the district risks being a Covid-19 epicentre in the country if illegal activities along the Limpopo River continue unchecked. “As residents we are ready to work with authorities in putting an end to noncompliance issues. We can’t continue with the business as usual attitude when death is staring at us,” he said. Beitbridge East legislator, Cde Albert Nguluvhe who also attended the meeting said Government must beef up security. “The situation along the border line is worrisome and fortunately I have raised the issued in our parliamentary committee on defence and security. We have engaged the police and they have agreed to act on the concerns. “If those illegal structures along the river front are not destroyed and people are left to do as they please, we risk having more infections in the district and country,” he said. “It is advisable for people to use formal crossing points so that health compliance issues are attended to with due diligence.” The legislator said it was also critical for the business community in Beitbridge to add their voice to the fight against the pandemic. Cde Nguluvhe said the church, residents’ associations and businesses should complement Government to minimise new infections. “I commend the Zimbabwe Christian Alliance for organising this meeting where frontline stakeholders interface and share notes. It is pleasing to see the community coming together. However, we have noted that there was lack of coordination on health matters at community level,” he said. The legislator urged business people who are fueling smuggling activities to redirect their efforts towards eradicating urban poverty. He said they need to partner churches and buy food hampers to help those who are food insecure rather than exploiting people they are hiring to carry out illegal activities along the border. Cde Nguluvhe said some of the criminal activities were not only a security threat, but opened up the country to more infections as people enter and leave the country undetected. Beitbridge Pastors Fraternal Chairperson, Busani Moyo said religious leaders were disturbed by some people’s failure to comply with lockdown regulations, hence they decided to bring together all stakeholders to speak with one voice. “We need to work together as a community. It is important that we all speak with one voice to save lives,” he said. Beitbridge Rural District Council chief executive officer, Mr Peter Moyo said they had engaged traditional leaders and the local Covid-19 Task-Force to educate communities living along the Limpopo River on the dangers associated with border jumping and smuggling.