The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
TOPFLIGHT footballers that take part in social games during the Covid-19 lockdown risk being hauled before the Premier Soccer League disciplinary committee for bringing the name of the league into disrepute. The PSL has also warned such footballers that they will not be covered by the league’s medical aid partners Fidelity Life Assurance in the event of injuries. There have been reports of Premiership players participating in money games, with Highlanders’ striker Mitchell Katsvairo, Ngezi Platinum Stars midfielder Devon Chafa and Chicken Inn defensive midfielder Tichaona Chipunza among players that have reportedly been cautioned for competing in social games. Ngezi Platinum Stars are livid at Chafa and coach Rodwell Dhlakama has threatened to sack the former Dynamos and FC Platinum midfielder. Chicken Inn have also started investigating allegations levelled against Chipunza. Katsvairo, a former Chicken Inn, Kaizer Chiefs and Ngezi Platinum Stars forward, was seen in the company of Rodrick Mutuma, who now plies his trade in the DR Congo, attending a social football match in Harare’s Budiriro suburb. “Social games are prohibited and illegal, as they bring the league and sponsors into disrepute. Players found participating in such matches will be brought before the PSL disciplinary committee. Our medical aid partnership with Fidelity Life Assurance does not cover such games because they are unsanctioned and illegal,” said PSL spokesperson Kudzai Bare. The Footballers Union of Zimbabwe (Fuz) issued a stern warning to players participating in such unsanctioned games. Fuz urged footballers to resist the temptation of playing money games, warning that doing so breached their employment contracts. “Most contracts have clauses which state that a player may not participate in indoor football and other organised or unorganised football activities. The player should not participate in high risk activities which could impair the activities that the player carries out for the club unless he has the prior written permission of the club. This rule also applies to the period between the football seasons and holiday periods. “The players risk abrupt end to their careers in these games. We know it has been long without football, but to play these games is totally unprofessional and risky. In these kind of games there is high risk of
injury because of the money involved. Players should also not forget that playing such games is a violation of the lockdown regulations,” said Fuz secretary-general Thomas Sweswe. Midfield legend Johannes Ngodzo has also been vocal against money games, challenging active footballers to shy away from such risky matches. — @ZililoR