The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Global Esports Federation (GEF) yesterday announced that World Taekwondo and the International Tennis Federation have become their newest members. Technology innovation company Refract also joined as the global partner for Interactive Technology to pioneer active esports worldwide. In a Press release, GEF president Chris Chan said his organisation was established to convene the global esports community and celebrate esports, adding that they have experienced an incredible acceleration in their engagement with the world’s international federations, especially during the Covid-19 pandemic lockdown. He said the state of play for sport was rapidly progressing and they were set to support the international federations in joining the world’s publishers, developers and the entire esports community in developing new platforms to evolve a real sport experience in the digital age. GEF is committed to pioneering the development of sport-based esports or active esports, in addition to growing traditional esports. “This aspect of esports showcases physical movement powered by technology, with virtual and augmented reality. It simulates real sport practice and promotes competition based on the universal principles of inclusivity, gender equality and fair play,” reads the press release. Chungwon Choue, World Taekwondo president, said they were thrilled to be an active member in the development of active esports, adding there was need to embrace technological advancement and promote healthy and active lifestyles around the world. “Esports brings the worlds of virtual and physical action together to create an all-new and exciting way to consume, interact and engage with sports. Esports present a myriad of opportunities for innovation and growth. The International Tennis Federation is keen to play an active part in global development as a Global Esports Federation member,” said Kelly Fairweather, ITF chief operating officer. The Zimbabwean duo of Tommy Sithole and Tyrone Seward lead two of the eight GEF Commissions. Sithole, who is also the Zimpapers board chairman, chairs the federation’s governance and ethics commission, while Seward, husband to Minister of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation Kirsty Coventry, deputises Chester King in the education, culture and wellness commission. “Participation from the international federations cements the Global Esports Federation’s commitment in developing digital properties in active esports. The undeniable power of sport elevated with technology can bring youth to sport and sport to youth. We are building a community where we connect and learn together,” said Paul Foster, the GEF chief operating officer. Launched on December 16, 2019, in Singapore, GEF draws on a diverse range of experience and expertise from the world of esports and the sporting community to help develop the credibility, legitimacy and prestige of esports in society.