The Chronicle Business Reporter
ALTHOUGH Africa’s hotel development was poised for growth at the start of 2020, with more than 78 000 rooms in 408 hotels in the pipeline, according sector surveys, industry experts say the outbreak of Covid-19 now threatens progress. W Hospitality Group, a member of the Hotel Partners Africa, acknowledged as one of the industry’s most authoritative sources, also concurs that the deadly global pandemic is now shattering the dreams of Africa’s hotel industry. “The growth of the chain’s presence in Africa has been a very positive story since we started this analysis in 2009,” said the group’s managing director, Mr Trevor Ward, in reference to their 12th annual survey on which the above projections are based. “It is quite clear from the numbers that the chains, the developers, the investors — and all of us at W Hospitality Group! — continue to believe in the opportunities that Africa presents in the hotel and tourism industry. “However, our industry has been devastated by the impact of Covid-19, possibly more so than most other economic sectors, mainly because of the almost total shutdown of borders and grounding of airlines which means no guests.” With that background, he said their group projects a slowdown in pipeline growth in 2020 as the hotel sector gets to grips with the new reality. With so many of the players locked down, Mr Ward added, fewer deals will be signed, and it is inevitable that some of the planned openings in 2020 will be delayed due to closed or slower-paced construction sites, restrictions on funding and a lack of market demand. “According to our latest data, there are 90 hotels with 17 000 rooms scheduled to open in 2020 but we estimate that at least half of these will be delayed, bringing the actualisation rate down to no more than 40,” said Mr Ward. This year’s African Hotel Chain Development Pipeline survey covers 35 international and regional hotel contributors across the 54 countries in north and sub-Saharan Africa, and in the Indian Ocean islands. It reveals a 3,6 percent increase on the 2019 pipeline. Most encouraging was a record 68 chain hotels opening last year which is 75 percent of those which were scheduled to open with 11 000 rooms. The performance was substantially up from the 39 percent of those scheduled to open in 2018 actually doing so. The findings of the 2020 Pipeline report, together with a mid-year update, would be discussed in depth at Bench Events’ new virtual conference, “Africa Tomorrow” to be held on 21 July. The event is complementary to the Africa Hotel Investment Forum (AHIF), the leading hospitality investment conference in Africa, which has in previous years connected business leaders to serious investors, driving funds into tourism projects, infrastructure and hotel development across the continent. Marriott, the world’s largest hotel chain, has the largest pipeline in Africa, 22 percent more hotels and six percent more rooms than second-placed Accor, which has been catching up fast, signing 25 new deals last year compared to Marriott’s 17 new projects. Said Mr Ward: “We have to wait and see what will happen in the second half of 2020, and in 2021 as we emerge from lockdown and other restrictions. “Tourism is such an important industry in Africa, because of the direct and indirect jobs that it creates and sustains as well as its strong foreign currency earnings. We are anxious to see hotels reopen and get back to contributing to the African growth story.” Mr Matthew Weihs, managing director of Bench Events, which is staging Africa Tomorrow, said: “Right now, we are facing the biggest recession in history. For those seeking to operate hotels, it is a dreadful time. However, for the savvy investors, this is actually a moment of opportunity because hotels are a long-term investment and one of the secrets of success is to spend money during the bottom of the economic cycle in order to capitalise on the upturn as soon as it comes. That’s one reason why I expect the networking sessions at Africa Tomorrow will be very busy and fruitful.”