The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
A WELL-WISHER has paid part of Highlanders’ development side Bosso 90’s affiliation fees, putting to rest fears of the team being kicked out of the Zifa Southern Region Division One League. Bosso90, who failed to meet the March Zifa Southern Region Division One League deadline to pay affiliation fees, got a reprieve to pay before resumption of games after the Covid-19 lockdown. Bheka Sibanda, a Highlanders member who pays ball boys allowances for Bosso’s home games, paid $11 000 to Zifa on Thursday. Zifa Southern Region hiked its affiliation fees from $2 000 to $25 000 for clubs that were in the league last season. Newly promoted clubs have to fork out $30 000 compared to $2 500 last season. Bosso90 are among a number of clubs that were staring expulsion from the Zifa Southern Region Division One for failing to affiliate on time. “As a Bosso member, I understand that the future of the club is in development hence my assistance. For Highlanders to succeed, we have to play our part as fans, members and the leadership. This is our small way as a family of helping the club in a time of need because we don’t know when games will start. What we all know is that for Division One, the club pays using revenue generated from first team games,” said Sibanda. Besides Bosso90, the other clubs that were yet to pay their affiliation fees by the first deadline are army side Indlovu Iyanyathela, newly promoted Ingagula and Ajax Hotspurs. Teams that had either paid full or part of the affiliation include championship favourites Talen Vision, ambitious gold miners Casmyn of Turk Mine, ZPC Hwange, Arenel, Zimbabwe Saints, Victoria Falls-based Mosi Rovers, Makomo, Emakhandeni Pirates, Trumus, Quality Foods and Mainline. “We can confirm that a club member has paid part of our developmental side Bosso90’s affiliation fee. The club would like to extend its gratitude to this member. We are actually pleased with the way fans and members have been supportive of our junior policy and the club in general,” said Highlanders’ spokesperson Ronald Moyo. — @ZililoR