The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
With Facebook now the new venue for performances as public gatherings remain restricted, more and more artistes are using the platform to stage shows in order to remain relevant in the arts scene. While some like Janet Manyowa, Trevor Dongo and Tammy Moyo have been brave to host their own shows on their Facebook pages, most have been reluctant and have been waiting for various music promoters like Fusion Media Group, Credisi, Bulawayo Unlocked, Nash TV and Passion Java to invite them to perform on their platforms. One such artiste who has been reluctant to stage his own show is Jah Prayzah, leaving fans hungry for his performance. While fans hoped to watch him in action for his album launch last month, he went another route, instead launching the album on YouTube. They seemingly did not lose hope as they were hopeful that days later, he would stage a show to perform the new tracks but alas, that was not to be. About two weeks later though on June 5, he was invited to perform at the Unicef Internet of Good Things virtual launch and fans were super excited that they were finally going to watch their icon. Sadly for them, their icon preferred to perform tracks from the new album likely because he felt that is what they wanted. But judging from the comments, they seemed to be in the mood for golden oldies as the new album does not have many danceable tunes. When they were warming up to his performance, it was round off as there were many artistes on the line-up and he had limited time on stage. Fortunately for his fans, two weeks later, he was to be invited to perform at the Nash TV Friday Night Live as the headline act. Upon hearing this, his fans were excited that finally, they would get to enjoy their icon’s performance. And indeed, when he took to the stage this past Friday, fans who had been averaging 4 000 quickly tripled upon seeing Jah Prayzah and his Third Generation band. The band was in top form and managed to give the people what they wanted – fusing old and new tracks. This was before a technical glitch suddenly emerged and interrupted the event for several minutes. When the show eventually continued, most had likely lost interest as the numbers had dwindled. Yet again, the fans had been left unsatisfied with most recommending that Jah Prayzah hosts his own show where he will perform for a long time as he will be the only act.