The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
TUSKERS have upped operations by disinfecting and fixing training fields in preparation for return of cricket to Bulawayo following a prolonged national lockdown. There are three Zimbabwe Cricket facilities in Bulawayo, Queens Sports Club, Bulawayo Athletic Club (BAC) and Emakhandeni Cricket Club, that are managed by Tuskers. BAC had overgrown grass and its wickets were in a sorry state as Tuskers channelled energy and limited manpower resources towards maintaining international venue, Queens Sports Club. The Emakhandeni facility was in a better state as a groundsman who lives within the club’s premises occasionally watered the fields and removed weeds. Nicholas Singo, Tuskers’ general manager, said they have been busy with grounds work while waiting for club action to return. “We have disinfected, repaired the wickets and done general maintenance of the outfield (at Queens Sports Club). We also attended to BAC, including its outfield which had overgrown grass,” said Singo. Cricket is one of the few sports that have been given the green light to resume training during the Covid-19 lockdown. The senior national men’s team has started training while awaiting Government approval to host Afghanistan for a limited overs series between July and August. Bulawayo-based national team players tested negative for Covid-19 and underwent a fitness test conducted by former national team fast bowler and provincial coach Njabulo Ncube at Queens Sports Club. With other activities still banned, Tueskers’ ambitious development programme has also taken a knock. In March, just before the lockdown, ZC launched a programme aimed at developing women’s cricket after successfully hosting a coaching clinic for 60 girls at Queens Sports Club on Women’s Day. ZC had also set plans for the senior women’s national team players to train girls at primary and secondary schools in Bulawayo. Renowned developmental coach Trevor Phiri was selected to head the training programme in Bulawayo under the Tuskers’ franchise. “Schools are still closed and there are no activities. This means all programmes that had been set have been disrupted and the only thing we can do is to maintain the facilities so that when the sport returns we are ready,” said Singo. — @ZililoR