The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
SQUASH Rackets Association of Zimbabwe (Sraz) is appealing for sponsorship to renovate dilapidated courts at schools around the country as part of its plans to revive the sport. The association chairman Lucky Mlilo said unlike most federations that get assistance from the International Olympic Committee (IOC), they have to look for their own funding to sustain the game since squash is not an Olympic sport. Mlilo said they are keen to have the sport played at schools around the country. “The challenges we face are financial in nature as we do not get any assistance from the national fiscus. We get assistance from a few corporate partners but it is not enough for us to pursue our plans for the growth and development of the sport. There are a number of dilapidated squash courts at schools, which need to be renovated. We are still speaking to our corporate friends for assistance. Squash is not an Olympic sport and as such does not get assistance from the IOC,” said Mlilo. He said Squash Federation of Africa-SFA was in the process of trying to develop the sport in some countries that have not formalised the sport. Mlilo said SFA will work with the World Squash Federation-WSF to grow and develop squash in Africa and Asia, which are the continents that have been lagging behind. In the last two weeks, SFA hosted two discussions with squash leaders in Africa and the WSF executive, with the aim of finding ways of assisting countries to develop the game. Mlilo said Sraz has been working closely with the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC) and Ministry of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation in coming up with guidelines to curb the spread of Covid-19 when the sport resumes. Sports classified as low risk such as golf, darts, tennis, cricket and swimming have been given the green light to resume activities. “It is our hope that squash will also be allowed to resume soon. Squash has been classified as a medium risk sport. Squash players are keeping in shape by exercising at their homes and are ready to resume playing and will adhere to measures that Sraz has submitted to SRC,” said Mlilo. Covid-19 pandemic caused the cancellation of tournaments such as the World Juniors Squash championship, which was supposed to be held in July 2020 in Australia. The World Masters championship that was supposed to be held in Poland in August has also been cancelled. Regional tournaments are not likely to take place this year. The traditional Zimbabwe Squash Open which is held in Bulawayo in August and normally attracts players from the Sadc region, is also in doubt. — @ZililoR