The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Health Reporter
An additional 100 000 food insecure Zimbabweans in urban areas are going to benefit from the United Nations World Food Programme following new funding amounting to US$10 million. The contribution by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) will assist almost 100 000 people who will each receive US$13 monthly cash transfers. The beneficiaries will receive the assistance through e-vouchers that they can redeem in supermarkets and get food. According to the September 2019 Zimbabwe Vulnerability Assessment Committee (ZimVAC), more than 2,2 million people in cities and towns are food insecure. The Covid-19 has worsened economic instability thereby significantly impacting urban residents already living from hand to mouth. Those set to benefit are from Bulawayo, Harare, Hwange, Kwekwe, Victoria Falls, Kariba, Gokwe, Mutare, Masvingo and Gweru. In a statement, WFP said the monthly cash transfers started being distributed in January this year. About 240 000 people were benefitting from the programme before the number was increased to 340 000. “The United Nations World Food Programme welcomed an additional US$10 million in funding from the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) for families in urban areas of Zimbabwe struggling to meet their daily food needs due to the impacts of Covid-19,” read the statement. “The contribution will assist almost 100 000 people with monthly cash transfers equivalent to US$13 each, enabling them to meet almost two-thirds of their daily food requirements.” Beneficiaries, according to WFP will receive e-vouchers that they can redeem in supermarkets and get food. “WFP forecasts that by March next year at least 3,3 million people which is almost half of the country’s urban population, will be food insecure. This generous and timely contribution will help alleviate the suffering of a large number of people struggling to cope with the twin shocks of Covid-19 and a deteriorating economy,” said Mr Eddie Rowe, WFP Zimbabwe Representative and Country Director. — @thamamoe