The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau THE Minister of Transport and Infrastructure Development, Engineer Joel Biggie Matiza yesterday said the Private Public Partnership (PPP) between the Government and Zimborders to upgrade Beitbridge Border Post at a cost of $241 million has not been cancelled. Zimborders is implementing the project with Raubex as its contracted partner to carryout civil works and the initial pre-commencement works started year. According to Minister Matiza civil works were recently temporarily stopped to observe ongoing efforts to combat Covid-19. The Minister said recent media that civil works had stopped because Raubex abandoned the project due to non-payment for services by Government were false. “The Ministry of Transport would firstly like to state in no uncertain terms that Raubex or Zimborders have not abandoned the project.   Their reasons for not being on site are solely related to the Covid-19 pandemic,” said the Minister. “The consortium’s top priority is the health and safety of all those involved in the project, and they therefore wish to respect each country’s lockdown regulations. Raubex plan to return to the site shortly.  We would like to clarify that the project is a Private Public Partnership with the Government of Zimbabwe and not a government funded project.” He said the necessary funding for the modernisation and upgrading of Beitbridge Border Post was being raised by Zimborders through institutional investors and commercial banks, and will need to be repaid over a period of time. Minister Matiza said they expect construction works to be completed in two years. He also dismissed claims that the Government intends to introduce a new tolling structure that will see an increase in toll fees. “The construction period is envisaged to take two years and tolling will only commence upon completion of the individual terminal buildings and their related ICT infrastructure.  It must also be noted that the management and overall ongoing maintenance of the facility will be the responsibility of the border management company and not the Government of Zimbabwe,” said the Minister. The new border post, he said will be significantly upgraded and enhanced, making it the most efficient border crossing in the region. Minister Matiza said by leveraging cutting edge technology and state of the art infrastructure, Beitbridge border will be transformed into a modern border. He said upon completion, crossing of cargo and people will be fast and convenient, without compromising on safety and security. “The construction includes three new terminal buildings as well as new roads and gatehouses. “It also involves redesigning the complete flow of the border post, the introduction of a state-of-the-art ICT system and an online platform to provide world class facilities for commercial operators to clear the border quicker,” said the Minister. The project’s manager Mr Herkie Sandernbergh, of Raubex Construction recently said that they were on course to complete the civil works. He said the modernisation programme was being rolled out in three phases: pre-commencement works, internal border infrastructure development and outside border infrastructure development.