The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo DRUG abuse is a growing nuisance in many societies as school and college going youngsters are increasingly becoming addicted. In addition to frequently abused over-the-counter cough syrups is a rise in the exploitation of illicit substances. Sold for about ZWL$50 per 200ml bottle, the highly intoxicating Double Punch, Mbarure, Mega Cane Spirit and Ice have seen a spike in uptake despite the fact that they are illegal. Concern is mounting over the rise in numbers of drug abusers all over the world, which in turn leads to loss of life and increase in crime. Many no longer have any regard for life with others even willing to kill to get their fix. By resolution 42/112 of December 7, 1987, the United Nations General Assembly decided to observe June 26 as the International Day Against Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking as an expression of its determination to strengthen action and co-operation to achieve the goal of an international society free of drug abuse. Illicit trafficking, which includes human trafficking and the smuggling of migrants, but also extends to trafficking in drugs and wildlife products is also of concern. Over the past decade, human trafficking has become one of the major concerns of the international community and one of the most profitable activities of organised criminal groups worldwide. Like many other forms of criminal activity, it takes advantage of conflicts, humanitarian disasters and the vulnerability of people in situations of crisis. Men, women and children are abducted and sold for sexual exploitation and forced labour. Trafficking of heroin, cocaine, cannabis and amphetamine-type stimulants (ATS) across the continent is increasing, combined with emerging trafficking of precursor substances. Supported each year by individuals, communities, and various organisations all over the world, World Drug Day aims to raise awareness of the major problem that illicit drugs represent to society. Recently, the field of addressing the world drug problem has been overwhelmed by misinformation of many kinds. Most drug policy specialists have reached the conclusion that the current approach to reducing drug use is a failure. It argues that state officials have applied a selective release of information in order to frame drug policy as a success. Therefore, narrow-scoped tactical achievements hide broader strategic and tactical failures, which blocks governmental learning and change in drug policy. The theme for this year’s International Day Against Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, “Better Knowledge for Better Care”, emphasises the need to improve the understanding of the world drug problem and how in turn, better knowledge will foster greater international co-operation for countering its impact on health, governance and security. Drug abuse does not necessarily mean using drugs such as cocaine, hallucinogens, cannabis, sedative hypnotics and opiates, but also encompasses prescription medications such as painkillers, sleeping pills, and tranquillisers. As per the World Drug Report 2017, released by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), about a quarter of a billion people used drugs at least once in 2015. These statistics, experts say, are worrying as there is a gap in addressing the drug abuse problem across the world. In Zimbabwe, cough syrups like BronCleer, Benylin and Histalix are popular particularly among youths who are constantly looking for a new high. Benylin is apparently prevalent because of its appeal to youths who do not conform to the usual stereotype of what a typical drug addict looks like. Many picture a drug addict to be an unemployed, uneducated or troubled person from a broken family but this is not so. Even the most unlikely people are falling victim to drug abuse. According to health experts, loosing teeth is a sure sign that one is abusing cough syrups. For example, codeine belongs to a class of drugs called opioids and the use of opioids leads to a dry mouth. Health experts say it has an atropine-like effect on the mouth, which means it makes it very dry and a chronic dry mouth will lead to acid erosion of the enamel, discolouration and loss of teeth. This dryness of mouth is called xerostomia. It is said what has made the syrups particularly attractive to young people in the more affluent suburbs of the city has been the constant endorsement they get from hip-hop superstars in America. However, even cough syrup addicts like rappers Lil Wayne and Rick Ross have reportedly suffered seizures from their consumption. While the two rappers were quickly rehabilitated and put back on stage, the same cannot be said for Bulawayo addicts as the city does not have specialised rehabilitation centres to cater for drug addicts. BronCleer is already banned in Zimbabwe but more needs to be done to combat drug abuse in the country. Tighter controls at the border would be useful to help deter importation of abused over the counter drugs. Adcock Ingram has already reduced the alcohol percentage contained in each bottle of BronCleer, an important step in fighting the scourge. In 2014, the Government engaged the Botswana government to ask for stricter enforcement on the sale of over-the-counter medicines, another step in the right direction. There have been many public rallies to promote awareness about the dangers of illicit drug use, with governments and organisations taking the lead in organising campaigns to address drug abuse. Today’s goal is to strengthen global action and co-operation towards creating a society that is free from drug abuse and unlawful drug trade.