The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
NKAYI-based Maskandi musician Clopas Sikhosana has realised his dream after he released his first album titled Kumnandi last Friday. Sikhosana is the man behind a video clip of a song which addresses the effects of the pandemic in rural areas. The clip that was recently shared by Madlela Skhobokhobo on social media became an instant hit. This led people to hold a search for Sikhosana on the Internet as they wanted to show appreciation of his talent and Madlela Skhobokhobo decided to travel to Nkayi to look for him. After finding him, he brought him to Bulawayo where he recorded an album, his first, at the Cite Studios two weeks ago. He now goes under the moniker Sikhosana Buhlungu. The album that has so far been well received, is the culmination of a 14-year dream that Sikhosana envisaged when he started strumming his guitar in rural Nkayi. With this album, Sikhosana collaborated with Jeys Marabini and Madlela Skhobokhobo. The album consists of five tracks Kumnandi feat Madlela, Rasta, Isomiso, Amasiko feat Jeys Marabini and 2009. Songs that have captivated the hearts of many include the title track Kumnandi (that shot him into fame) and Isomiso. There’s not much singing but more like poetry which has social commentary mixed in with comedy. For those who are curious as to what people in Nkayi get up to can be given a window to look through by listening to Sikhosana’s album. “The reason why people love the song Kumnandi is because its relatable. Many people have a rural background especially those who grew up in Nkayi. It’s a fusion between Sikhosana’s Maskandi and Madlela’s Rhumba music. The story is relatable about life in the rural areas before and after Covid-19,” said Cde Phil of Khulumani FM. At Skyz Metro FM, the song Isomiso is said to be popular with their listeners as it is comic and educational at the same time. According to Sikhosana’s representative Kudakwashe Takundwa the album is now available online. “The album is available on Distrokid, Amazon, Spotify, iTunes and Deezer with each song ranging from US 75 cents each to US 99 cents depending on the platform it is being sold,” said Takundwa. All the songs depict the life in his village of Gwamba in Nkayi. “Kumnandi is inspired by life stories that he has encountered in his community in Nkayi. He also uses this album to urge people to de-stress in these difficult times,” said Takundwa. In order for Sikhosana to get more money they were registering him under Zimbabwe Music Rights Association (Zimura). He said they hope the pandemic blows over so that Sikhosana gets paying live shows. “We are hoping post the Covid epidemic we will host a number of shows for him in Nkayi. We are also working on making sure that he gets registered with music organisations like Zimura so that in the near future he also gets royalties,” said Takundwa. From online sales, the money will come as a great relief to Sikhosana and his family. “Album sales will be considered too. We are also going to be having discs on sale as well. The company handling the online sales will distribute accordingly when some funds have been made via online sales,” said Takundwa. — Follow on Twitter @bonganinkunzi