The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
A GWERU-based financier, Tinrue Finance, has come up with a Covid-19 package to assist struggling property owners to clear their debts and avoid losing their valued assets. With many individuals having been left financially incapacitated by the Covid -19-induced lockdown, which has seen some companies trimming workforce and small to medium enterprises shutting down, a lot of home seekers with housing stands, some of whom had started developing them, have also not been spared. Some are now contemplating disposing of the stands just to have disposable income to feed their families. Government has also chipped in with different Covid-19 relief packages to assist the vulnerable people with cash payments as well as the small to medium enterprises to cushion them against the negative effects of the lockdown induced by the pandemic. Tinrue Finance chief executive officer, Mr Nyasha Gonese, said their company has set aside a fund aimed at assisting clients settle debts to local companies through affordable loans to avoid losing their stands or houses. He could not disclose the figures for the intervention but said they were aware of the effects of Covid-19 on the finances of ordinary people both in the formal and informal sectors. “If you run the danger of losing your stand or house due to challenges in monthly payments to service providers during Covid- 19 period, Tinrue Finance is advancing affordable loans through debt factoring to affected persons,” said Mr Gonese. “Instead of losing your property back to the seller, we come in and settle the debt for you and you then arrange a flexible payment plan.” Mr Gonese said in line with Government policy to ensure access to cheaper and affordable housing for all, there is need to assist people affected by Covid-19-induced lockdown to stay afloat. “We have taken this as a step towards assisting business and individuals to stay afloat during Covid-19-induced lockdown. We are complementing Government programmes to rescue businesses through a variety of stimulus packages,” he said. Tinrue Finance is a member of TM group of companies that has interests in agriculture, health services, housing and construction and ICT.