The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
ZBC may want to consider taking up more productions that have been entertaining masses on the Internet for broadcast on television as they are worth it and will likely boost the national broadcaster’s viewership. Already, Nash TV which has literally taken over show promoters’ role by being at the forefront of organising music shows online, is giving ZBC their footage so that Zimbabweans in the broader sphere can watch the performances. Drama series Wadiwa Wepa Moyo which was a hit on the Internet, getting over 200 000 views per episode has also been picked by ZBC and now more people are enjoying it. Having productions which are hits online shown on ZBC will certainly give artistes a broader fan base and afford those Zimbabweans who do not have access to the Internet a chance to also be entertained by local content during the lockdown. The Bulawayo Arts Festival which was streamed online has come and gone with those who had an opportunity to watch it on various Facebook pages hailing the performances and quality of the production. However, the festival which served as a celebration of Bulawayo’s 126th anniversary, was only watched by a few who had access to the Internet with the greater audience failing to watch it. This is where the national broadcaster comes to play as they can chip in, strike a deal that is mutually beneficial to the two parties and air such events on their platform. Other events that are coming up well online are the Lockdown Parties held by Fusion Media Group and Gara Mumba Iwe concerts. Looking through the comments on these shows, most of them are complementary in nature with people thanking producers and artistes for their efforts. Having such productions shown on ZBC, besides getting the artistes known, will give Zimbabweans a window to see what is happening in the arts in other places, thereby promoting the country’s art. The more the merrier as the adage goes and this is an opportunity for ZBC to bring about quality productions to the masses.