The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent ARTISTES in the Matabeleland region have stood up to ensure they stay relevant during lockdown by tapping  into hosting online shows. The artistes have been found wanting lately and at once faced criticism for failing to host the online shows before they made known that bankruptcy had hard hit theirs pockets to host such shows. Tonight at 7pm in Bulawayo at the affluent suburb of Ascot, a mixed genre affair will engulf as Afro-pop musician Mzoe 7, drummist Djembe Monks, musician Vuyo Brown and Afro-soul musician Thandy Dhlana will entertain fans at an event dubbed #UN75 Virtual concert. The event is aimed at Zimbabwean artsites engaging the public in Covid-19 prevention and shaping a better future for all. In Gwanda, an array of artistes that include Bolamba Culture Birds, GDA Fire, Master Zhoe, Zhezhingtons, Bry, Khoi Khoi, Skollah, Kadder. Ghetto Smuffs, Good Fellaz, Zagoe Rage, Sbhevara, Prophet Makasi, Reflection Movers and Cutie G are billed to perform during the online commemorations of the Day of the African Child. The Day of the African Child is commemorated every year on June 16 and was initiated after a student uprising in Soweto, South Africa, where students who marched in protest against apartheid-inspired education, were brutally murdered. The event will be streamed live tomorrow at 7PM on the Facebook pages of Gwanda Magazine, X Studios Fan page, Khoi Khoi Fan page and Bry Fan page. Savuka Arts Association chairperson Adrian “Drivo” Musa said, “We are set to go live at 7pm as we have united as artistes from Matabeleland South province to ensure that we join the rising online shows thing.” Meanwhile, music and dance outfit Western Khazins have postponed their debut virtual show which was billed for tonight due to unforeseen circumstances. The group composed of members, Archibald K Mumbamarwo known as Father K, Bruce Chirumba aka Uncle, Artwel Sibanda aka Brother K and Edington Sibanda aka Sonny K was supposed to host their event at Sadee lanceworks situated at RGMugabe Way and 14th avenue. @mthabisi_mthire