The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
KEEPING a player who eats, breathes and lives football at home was never going to be an easy task. In the past few weeks, incidents of professional footballers engaging in money games have spiked. Money games in the country have become popular since the national lockdown three months back suspended all forms of formal sport and recreation. A number of players contracted to Division One and Premier Soccer League clubs have found solace in playing money games to keep fit and supplement their earnings, as clubs are also reeling financially since the the lockdown. Players were involved in hide and seek games with the police, but since relaxation of the lockdown, money games are now played more openly. Despite relaxation on restrictions, football is among the high-risk sports that remains barred by the Sports and Recreation Commission. Players are aware of risks that come with playing such games, but more and more players face disciplinary action every year for partaking in money games. “Football players will remain, football players; they are aware of the risks involved in playing these games, but each time you see them taking part in these unsanctioned games that can end their careers. With this Covid-19 crisis, it has become even more difficult to control them. “Yes, the break has been too long and the frustration is creeping in and you can tell when talking to the boys that they want to get back to the field of play, but that is not an excuse to put your career at risk,” said coach Kudzayi Mhandire. “Money games are dangerous, but I think that desire to play again is overwhelming our players. Even as coaches get frustrated, as all we can do is to keep encouraging the boys to keep fit by jogging and following some exercise routines we have them at the beginning of the lockdown.” He said motivation could only be achieved for a certain period of time before reaching a point of uncertainty, as is the case presently. Training programmes are an event over a period of time and coaches set programmes unbeknown to them that the inactivity would take this long. “However, players must keep fit and disregard what has happened and take it as if we are in January and it’s still preseason all over again,” said Mhandire. Scientists have indicated that suspension and cancellation of sporting competitions could cause significant grief, stress, anxiety, frustration and sadness for athletes and they needed psychological help to cope.
Sports psychology, however, is one key component of modern-day sport that has been relatively ignored in Zimbabwe. Last week the Premier Soccer League promised to come hard on players involved in money games, saying they were illegal. The league warned that players involved in unsanctioned games will not be covered by its medical aid partnership with Fidelity Life Assurance. – @innocentskizoe