The Chronicle Ninety-eight days after schools were ordered prematurely to close on Covid-19 fears, some pupils trooped back to their schools yesterday ahead of the start of the June/July public examinations tomorrow. They must be delighted and anxious at the same time to return to class. Delightful because pupils always love school, their many friends and the fun they always have there. Indeed, some of our happiest days are those we had or have at school. However, we must hasten to say that the reason why schools were forced to close on March 24 remains and is growing therefore the school kids must be anxious as well over Covid-19. The June/July 2020 examination period for Ordinary Level will run from tomorrow to July 20, while the Advanced Level session also begins tomorrow, ending on July 23. According to Government figures, 5 700 candidates are registered for the June/July examinations, down from 5 900 who sat for the exams over the corresponding period last year. If we include their teachers and support staff, we can estimate that there are about 6 000 people back at school until the final public test is written on July 23. We are cognisant of the fact that Covid-19 binds us to socially and physically distance, to take other preventive measures such as regularly washing our hands, practising good respiratory hygiene, sanitising our hands, wearing face masks and paying regular attention to our body temperature. It is our hope that, as the kids, their teachers and support staff begin work tomorrow, the foregoing and other preventive and response measures are in place to ensure that the next 24 days are safe for everyone. We note that some countries that have opened schools have seen Covid-19 cases rising. While we have that in mind, we have to state that in our case it is not everyone back at school but only 5 700 children who are writing their exams and their teachers. Official statistics indicate that there are about 4,5 million learners and 166 000 teachers and support staff in the country, a majority of whom are still at home. It must, thus, be easier for the school authorities and the Government to get preventive measures in place for 6 000 or so people. This would have been impossible if 4,5 million learners plus 166 000 teachers were back at school. Primary and Secondary Education Minister Cain Mathema expressed confidence in an interview with our sister paper, Sunday News yesterday that most schools that will be used as examination centres have already put in place measures to ensure the process runs smoothly. “As a ministry we are preparing as normal for the examinations, we are putting in place the preventive measures as guided by the World Health Organisation and we are confident that all will be in place by the time the examinations start. Our main aim is not to expose our learners and invigilators to Covid-19 hence our commitment to adhering to the High Court order,” said Minister Mathema. “This is an issue that was not announced overnight, instead the President made the proclamation about a month ago and this caters for all schools be it public, private or boarding schools, so school authorities were thus expected to have made the necessary arrangements for their learners.” Everyone hopes that all is in place for a safe return for children to school, the first in a phased approach to the reopening of schools. After the June/July examination writing classes, those writing their final public tests in October/November — Grade 7, Form 4, Form 6 — are expected back in school at the end of next month. Examination classes for next year — Grade 6, Form 3, Form 5 — are expected next, Grades 3, 4 and 5, Forms 1 and 2 next, followed by Grades 1 and finally the early childhood development classes. The phased approach is the best one for us considering the capacity we have as a country to respond to Covid-19. It allows authorities to gauge the rate of infection in clearly defined stages. So we think the phase that begins tomorrow is the beginning of what must be a learning process for all as we move forward. Whatever lessons would be drawn from the period in terms of Covid-19 must inform whatever response mechanisms that would have to be put in place in succeeding phases. Yes, their learning has been disrupted by 98 days of the lockdown, but we wish the children success as they write their public examinations. We wish good health for them too, their teachers and support staff.