The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
A HOMELESS man died on the spot after he was attacked by an elephant in Victoria Falls yesterday afternoon. The man whose identity could not be established yesterday, was a known vagrant who lived behind Encore Budget Lodge. He was attacked just before 3PM near National Railways of Zimbabwe (NRZ) houses between the railway station and Falls Club. At the time of the attack, he was reportedly walking from the direction of Falls Club towards the railway station. A resident who witnessed the attack, said they tried to warn him about presence of the elephants but he continued walking. “These elephants have been here for a week. He always passes by here and today we tried to stop him but he couldn’t understand us. The elephant gave him a warning sound and he tried to run away but he fell down and it caught up with him,” said Mr Clemence Chirwa who witnessed the attack. He said the man screamed in agony as the jumbo trampled him. Other witnesses said the man threw stones at the elephant as he was passing by before it charged at him. The Chronicle was told that the elephant was part of a herd that had been roaming around especially behind old TM Pick n Pay building for some days. It reportedly chased after a number of people in separate incidents yesterday as they walked near a night club. Victoria Falls Councillor Joseph Dzangai said he ran for his dear life when it charged at him at around 10AM as he was passing by. “I saw it in the morning behind old TM building as I was walking along the road. It was about 30 metres away in the bushes and started charging towards me. I ran for my dear life and it only stopped when it saw that I was a distance away,” said Cllr Dzangai. A news crew visited the scene as police were taking the body away. Police officer Commanding Victoria Falls District Chief Superintendent Rudo Chitombi said: “We have noticed more elephant movement because there are less people as a result of the lockdown, hence we want to encourage residents to be vigilant and always quickly alert ZimParks rangers when they come across wild animals especially elephants.” .-@ncubeleon