The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu and Mkhululi Ncube
South Africa-based rhumba groups, Dubia Masters and Dupute Warriors have joined the fight against Covid-19 by combining forces to produce a single to educate the public about the pandemic which has claimed many lives. The single titled Covid-19 was released two weeks ago on YouTube where it was accompanied by a video. The educative song was sung in Ndebele, Kalanga and English and seeks to rebut some myths about Covid-19, such as to say that the disease only kills white people. The track which begins on a slow note informs the public to take heed of the call to stay home, wash hands regularly and follow all health directives from authorities. It is also a prayer for God to intervene so that doctors can be able to deal with the situation. Dupute Warriors leader Thobani Dube said it was easy for them to work on the single as their songs have always been centred around themes that affect the public. “Music is a great instrument for educating the people so we decided to add our voice to the call for people to protect themselves against this deadly pandemic. At the same time, we’re comforting our fans who have been affected by the virus,” said Thobani. He said Covid-19 has affected his band as they have had to shelve some of their plans for the year as they are not able to conduct practice sessions. “Life is difficult for us as we’re not getting any support. Being foreigners, we are not eligible for any support so it’s more difficult for us as our families back home are dependent on us,” he said. Dubia Masters front-man Kholwani Dube said since they have the capacity to reach out to the masses through their music, they decided to assist governments by spreading Covid-19 messages through the song. He said the pandemic had affected them greatly as musicians based in South Africa. “As musicians, we survive through live shows and because of the pandemic, we haven’t been able to stage live shows and almost all our bookings for the year have gone down the drain. This means hunger for us yet we have families to feed and support. “What makes it difficult for us is that we are based in a foreign land. It’s feels like a war breaking out when you are not in your motherland, you can adjust better when you are home,” said Kholwani.