The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
ZIMBABWE’S safari and hunting industry is counting losses due to outbreak of Covid-19 amid fears that the sector might take three years to recover from the effects of the global pandemic. The tourism sector has been severely crippled by the novel coronavirus, which has left scores of sector workers jobless as arrivals came to a halt. While efforts are being made to revamp domestic tourism, more needs to be done to harmonise the cost structure and intensify marketing strategies to entice the local travellers. Responding to questions, Gwayi Farmers Association chairman Mr Mark Russel, who also chairs the Gwayi Valley Intensive Conservation Area committee made up of wildlife conservancy operators, said direct safari hunting revenue of close to US$100 000 would be lost due to the disruption caused by Covid-19. He said the industry was also hard hit by massive cancellations with the hunting season that was set to commence in April suspended indefinitely. “Zimbabwe’s safari hunting industry has been negatively affected by between 80 and 90 percent due to client booking cancellations, postponements and staff job losses among others,” said Mr Russel. Zimbabwe’s hunting season traditionally runs from April to October. However, due to the Covid-19 induced lockdown, international hunters who make most of the clientele have either cancelled or postponed their travel, leaving the industry exposed to inactivity. “We are still under total lockdown in the industry. This is exacerbated by our regional and international partner’s statuses, which include their travel protocols. Being a landlocked country, Zimbabwe’s tourism is greatly affected by its foreign partners hence the future is bleak. It may take two to three years to recover to pre-Covid-19 levels,” lamented Mr Russel. “The losses are felt both directly and indirectly to the safari industry and downstream industries such as hospitality, retail, shipping/transport logistics industries as well as loss of income to families of staff and associated people.” He said the industry is abiding by lockdown regulations both locally and internationally. Major clients come from Germany, Spain, Austria, Hungary, Poland, Russia, USA. Mr Russel said conservation activities have also been affected as a result of zero income caused by Covid-19, amid fears of increase in poaching activities. He appealed to Government and conservation agencies to provide funds for the industry towards marketing, conservation, anti-poaching units, water supplies and maintenance of roads and fireguards as well as research. — @ncubeleon