The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
FAST rising group, Ngoma Ingoma alongside up-and-coming afro-pop/house musician Natalie “Nate” Manzungu thrilled fans on Monday evening as they put on a show-stopping performance at the Fusion Media Group (FMG) live sessions. The show which has been held on Monday’s for the past two months is growing with each week as it is getting more views with over 7 000 people having watched the live stream by this morning. Among those who watched the show were Charmaine Mudau, musicians Willis Wataffi, Mimmie Takurwana, Lorraine Maplanka, Chelsea Mguni and Yolanda Banda. Nate who is coming up very well was the first to take to the stage and her tuneful sound was out of the world as she performed Wakanyanya and wrapped up her performance with a teaser of her upcoming single, Tora Moto which features Ngoma Ingoma. Ngoma Ingoma took over the fort and the seven-piece ensemble nailed it through their songs Amalobolo and Kumnandi among others. The comments rained as auxiliary keyboardist Prince Joel Nyoni pulled a blue-chip performance with Samuzik, Carlos Jiri and De Lukes on the vocals while Stot kept the bass guitar alive as Tiyelani Chauke was on the keyboards and Obey Mudiwa on the drums. One of the show’s viewers, Blessed Esther who was overwhelmed with the talent on stage, thanked the online show’s organisers for unearthing Bulawayo’s adept artistes. “The thing with growing up in Bulawayo is that you always bump into these faces in town, but you don’t know they’re this talented. Thanks to the lockdown, we got to know our Bulawayo artistes better,” she said. As Ngoma Ingoma was performing their hit Amalobolo, one Simba Usore affirmed its viability by saying: “Is it only me who feels like paying lobola after hearing this song.” Musician and guitarist Willis Wataffi said: “Deep respect for you guys. Thank you for this,” while appreciating the performances. The next show will be held next Monday with the lineup yet to be unveiled. @mthabisi_mthire