The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
THREE months after the coronavirus pandemic shut down Britain, the English Premier League is back on the small screens tonight. Football fans from around the globe are excited following the return of football, which started with the German Bundesliga a month ago and the Spanish La Liga a week ago. It is, however, the return of the world’s most watched league, the English Premiership, that has generated a lot of interest, particularly from sports betting shops and punters alike. Sports betting in the country has over the years grown into a lucrative industry, catering for all sectors of life. It has grown from being a past-time activity to a source of livelihood for many. The unemployed make a living by predicting scores and results of sporting activities, while some employed people supplement their income through betting. Betting houses took a huge knock after the suspension of all sporting activities, particularly football. With betting houses still closed, many have resorted to online betting, focusing mainly on virtual football, which, however, is less rewarding compared to the real game. Popular site Betpawa has been offering people a chance to place their bets online for virtual games. Now punters have the chance to bet on live matches online with the return of the English League. Chronicle Sport yesterday spoke to some football fans and punters about their thoughts on the return of English football. Elvis Lunga said: “The return to football is a good sign even for our very own sports. Perhaps soon we will be able to watch our own local league. “La Liga in Spain is using CGI crowds and synthetic crowd noise to make empty stadiums seem full during broadcasts, which is great. “We hope to see that with the English league as well. Football ain’t as interesting without fans, but it’s good to have teams playing because we really missed football.” Another football lover Lifa Ndebele said it was good news that the people’s favourite league was back. “Sports betting for many people is a job, so it’s good that we can now place our bets online since the shops are not open yet and possibly make some money,” said Ndebele. Peter Mweene was excited that football is back. “We had resorted to betting virtual football online so I feel this is good news for all punters. The only challenge will be access to data, which is a bit expensive, but all in all it’s good to have football back,” said Mweene. Liverpool fan Allen Ndlovu was happy that his favourite team has been given the chance to lift the English Premiership title for the first time in 30 years after rumours had swelled that the campaign would be cancelled. “We all missed football and this is certainly good news for the Liverpool fans,” said Ndlovu. — @innocentskizoe