The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
There is a latest entry on the music scene in the name of Tyfah Guni, brother to urban grooves artiste Nox (real name Enock Guni) who seems very committed to putting the country’s music out there. Tyfah introduced himself to the people last Friday when he did what most local artistes can only aspire, performing on famed music platform — Channel O. Accompanied by Nox, the two performed live on Channel O alongside Jerusarema hit-maker Master KG. The performance was to launch their collaborative afro-soul house track titled Kure Kure. The song got positive feedback from those who watched its premiere which was quite encouraging. Tyfah Guni is however not new to music but is a person who has just reinvented himself with his recent works having an Afrocentric sound. Back in 2011, he, like his brother, was focused on the urban grooves sound. With his latest collaboration with Nox and Master KG that is set to hit the airwaves soon, Tyfah has placed himself well as many are beginning to notice and appreciate his talent. Speaking from his base in Midrand, Johannesburg, Tyfah said he started singing in 2011 and remained in the game but changing colours here and there so as to remain relevant. “I started singing in 2011 and managed to work with Diana Samkange on a song called Another Day that got airplay on radio. I also did a couple of songs with Nyasha Timbe, Drum Dada, Nox before venturing into music production,” said Tyfah. Through music production, Tyfah said doors started opening for him as he got to work with established artistes on various projects. “Last year, I started producing for big guys like Freeman on Let Me Know, Shinsoman on the songs Kutsotsonya, Daddy Vakabaka and Muporofita and King Shaddy on Havakure. I also worked with Sanii Makhalima and Ricky Fire. “On the side, I kept singing and produced singles. But now, I’m working on my debut album which I hope to have released by Christmas,” he said. Tyfah is known by some for the single Dollar Dollar which made waves in the diaspora. His latest single titled Kunamata Chete and old time favourite traditional song called Ngaitaure were also hits. “I started with urban grooves and then started leaning to afro-pop. Right now, I can say my sound is Afrocentric. I’ve also started tapping into soulful house and have managed to do a collaboration with one of South Africa’s renowned artistes, Master KG.” Tyfah said he was inspired to collaborate with Master KG after seeing the splendid work he had done with Nox on the single My Melody. “When we went to the studio, Master KG liked us so much that he requested to do more work with us. When we went for the second session, we did Kure Kure,” he said. – @mthabisi_mthire.