The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
POLICE in South Africa have arrested three men believed to be Zimbabweans and six South Africans for attempting to rob a post office in Limpopo Province. The suspects are reported to be part of a syndicate targeting major post offices when social grant pay outs are being processed. South African Police Services (SAPS) provincial police spokesperson, Brigadier Motlafela Mojapelo said the nine had been charged for conspiracy to commit armed robbery and possession of illegal firearms and ammunition following the incident last Friday. He said the gang has since appeared at the Sekhukhune Magistrate Court where they were remanded in custody to June 11 pending further police investigations. Brig Mojapelo identified those believed to be Zimbabweans as Tatenda Ruzive (24), Zephania Gwadivenga (28) and Raphael Ngwenya (27). The other suspects, all South Africans are Kgokong Mohlale Danny Tebeila (40), Tebogo Nchabeleng (28), Tsebisho Ntswane (25), Kabelo Pilusa (27), Tebogo Ramaila (33) and Isaac Tios (28). “The suspects were arrested during a snap operation that was conducted by members of the Tactical Response Team and Crime Intelligence. We received information about a possible armed robbery at a post office in Atok under Apel policing area and reacted swiftly leading to the arrest of the suspects. A suspicious vehicle, (Ford Ranger) with three occupants was spotted along the D4180 road between Atok and GaSelepe. Soon after stopping, the driver suddenly got out and allegedly pointed at the members with a firearm. The suspect was then shot and the firearm taken. He was taken to hospital where he was admitted under police guard,” he said. “Another vehicle, a Toyota Quantum with five occupants was spotted along the D4190 in the Atok area and the driver was also ordered to stop. When searching the vehicle, police found a firearm hidden inside and all five suspects were apprehended.” Brig Mojapelo said they were also pursuing four unknown suspects who on Thursday stormed into a post office in Seshego Zone 4 armed with firearms and demanded money from the tellers as social grants were being paid out. He said the gang managed to overpower a security guard on duty and wrestled away his service pistol. They then fled from the scene with an undisclosed amount of money. SAPS acting provincial police commander, Major General Jan Petrus Scheepers, said his team had done well in foiling the robbery. “It is now becoming clear that our post offices are beginning to be targets of armed robbers and as the police we will intensify our operations around all affected areas. I urge all relevant stakeholders to closely work with us to stop these criminals in their tracks,” concluded General Scheepers.