The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
THE Covid-19-induced lockdown has proven to be a perfect time for people to reflect on their lives in general and more importantly, it has shown the importance of investing in one’s trade or passion. Staying at home has given many people a lot of time and this time should be used wisely because when the lockdown restrictions are lifted, life will be different as there are likely to be many job losses. As such, it is high time that people who have not found their passion, painstakingly think about one, discover and nurture it as they are definitely going to need it in the near future. For those who discovered their talents and what they are passionate about earlier, the lockdown has given them time to perfect their God-given skills. This could either be gardening, painting, singing, sewing, reading, writing, the list is endless. This is the perfect time to invest in the things that make your passion tick simply because your passion should be used as your side hustle. For instance, if one loves being in the garden, this is the perfect opportunity to come up with a small gardening project that one can take care of so that when push comes to shove, they can sell the produce and get some money from it. Other than selling the produce, this project on its own is a good way of cutting on expenditure while also ensuring that the family leads a healthy lifestyle. Same goes for those who see themselves as culinary experts. Now is time for them to hone their skills over the stove or fire. While cooking one’s food is healthy, it is another way of cutting on costs as you will cut on the takeaways. Also, if the going gets tough, one can open a small takeaway in their neighbourhood where they can sell foodstuffs like homemade pies and pizzas and before they know it, they will be able to start their own restaurant. If one is a musician, this is the time to write as much music as you want, learn to play an instrument, just get the basics and if you’re lucky enough be in the studio, you can redo some of the work that you wanted to release and perfect it. Now is also a good time to release this music as people have ample time and are most likely to listen to your music. The whole essence is for one to invest in their passion, because that passion can be the one that bails you out when things go south as they are doing during these uncertain times.