The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter HE’S arguably the most successful Highlanders captains, leading the country’s oldest club to three consecutive Premier Soccer League titles, and it will take something extraordinary for any other Bosso skipper to surpass his achievements. Central defender Thulani ‘Biya’ Ncube led Highlanders to a historic feat, winning three championships on the trot, first in the 1998-1999 season, then in 2000 and 2001 before leaving to joining Ajax Cape Town in South Africa. Bosso were a mean machine and Ncube earned legendary status, as he led a host of stars that gave joy to multitudes of fans. Among the galaxy of stars Biya in that trailblazing Highlanders squad were 2000 Soccer Star of the Year Zenzo Moyo and 2002 Soccer Star of the Year Dazzy Kapenya, current Bosso assistant coach Bekithemba Ndlovu, Richard Choruma, Gift Lunga Jnr, Thabani Masawi, Blessing Gumiso, Johannes Ngodzo and Siza Khoza. He was a true leader on the pitch and could motivate the chips when they were down, restrategise when the coach’s plans hit a brick wall and at times single handedly won matches for Bosso. The retired defender is now into collegiate coaching in the United States of America where he has been based since 2003. Highlanders have gone 14 years without winning the PSL title, with their last league championship coming in 2006 when their former midfielder Methembe Ndlovu returned from the United States and coached them to victory. Could Biya be thinking of following in Ndlovu’s footsteps and become the Bosso saviour. The Gwabalanda-bred footie star told Chronicle Sport that he harbours dreams of one day coaching Bosso. “Yes, one day I would like to coach Highlanders; a club that gave me fame and unlocked opportunities,” said Ncube. Biya, who broke into first team in 1996, started off as a goalkeeper whilst at Inzwananzi Primary School and also turning out for Gwabalanda-based club Cambridge. At 14, Ncube moved to Highlanders’ rivals Zimbabwe Saints and stayed with Chikwata for two seasons before joining the Bosso juniors when he was in Form 3 after being lured by renowned juniors’ coach Ali “Baba” Dube. At Zimbabwe Saints, he was teammates with midfield maestro Choruma, who later reunited with him at Bosso in the championship winning side. He also played with one of his closest friends Mlamuleli Ncube, who ended up playing for Zimbabwe Saints’ first team and Hwange FC. In the Bosso junior ranks, Biya occasionally played as a midfielder or striker, hence his ability to easily adapt from defence to midfield when the coach needed him to during his playing days. He singles out Methembe Ndlovu as his childhood hero. Biya, who grew to become a versatile player, made his debut for Bosso in 1996 against Blackpool in a match that Collins Kabote gave him a torrid time. “My first game for the senior team, which was supposed to be memorable, turned out to be my worst as we lost 3-1 to Blackpool. Kabote really gave me a torrid time,” said Ncube. He singles out the encounter against old foes Dynamos in 1999 as his his most memorable game. The build up to that match was filled with drama and tension after the then PSL secretary-general Lesly Gwindi notified Bosso that striker Moyo and defender Kapenya were ineligible for the tie due to suspension. Bosso fought hard to have the duo included in their match day squad and eventually defied the PSL arguing that the two players should have missed earlier if indeed they were suspended. The fact that Gwindi was also a former Dynamos secretary-general did not help matters. “My best game was against Dynamos in 1999 when I scored a penalty and we won 2-0. That year we won the championship and beating Dynamos was sweet. Winning the 98-99 championship in my first year as club captain rates among my treasured moments, with the others being afforded an opportunity to captain the Young Warriors and senior national team in a single year,” Ncube said.