The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
Amapiano queen, Shasha who hails from Mutare has done the country proud by being the first Zimbabwean to be nominated for a BET Award. She is nominated for the Viewer’s Choice: Best New International Act together with some of the finest new voices on the globe — Rema (Nigeria) Celeste (UK), Young T & Bugsey (UK), Hatik (France) and Stacy (France). Commenting on the nomination, Shasha (real name Charmaine Shamiso Mpambiro), said she never saw the nomination coming. Shasha said she never thought she would make it in the music industry given that her parents were totally against her decision to pursue singing as a career. “I’m out of words. I did not see this coming at all. Honestly, I’m just grateful, thankful, excited, numb, just a whole lot of emotions. The mere fact that I’m nominated man! This is amazing,” Shasha told her thousands of fans moments after the news of her nomination broke on Monday evening. “I need you all more than ever,” she said before sharing the link to vote. Voting has already begun and closes this Friday at 5pm CAT. To vote, people need to follow BET_INTL on Instagram and like Shasha’s post there. Alternatively, they can cast their vote on the BET website. Locals, who, ever since the lockdown began, seem to have embraced their own content, were rallying behind Shasha as from Monday. So many posters have since been created with people urging each other to support their own and vote for Shasha. And judging by the feedback and posts confirming their votes, it seems Shasha is well in line to bag this award. In South Africa where she was hooked up with DJ Maphorisa by a cab driver, the canvassing has started as DJ Maphorisa is rallying behind her by sharing the news of her nomination. Her nomination has inspired many locals with some now of the opinion that in order to make it, one must really get out of their comfort zone and chase their dream. Leading the BET nominees is Drake with six nominations. Megan Thee Stallion and Roddy Ricch follow with five nominations. Beyoncé, Nicki Minaj, Chris Brown, Lizzo and DaBaby tie with four nominations each. The awards which are in their 20th year, seek to showcase the best and most beautiful aspects of the Black experience — celebrating Black music’s present and future and elevating the culture and being a driving force for social change. Internationally, the show will simulcast on BET Africa at 2am CAT on June 29.