The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE country’s traditional giants Dynamos, Highlanders and Caps United have not been performing well in recent years, but they remain the destinations of choice for many footballers largely because of their huge popularity. Former Dynamos and Black Rhinos defender Gift Saunyama said because of the trio’s huge support base locally, playing for any of them provided one with enormous opportunities. He said when he was at Dynamos, a fan offered him a place to study with the Chartered Institute of Customer Relationship management. Because of the rapport Highlanders have with the businessman community, a notable number of their players managed to get houses in the city’s western suburbs, especially in Cowdray Park. Former Bosso players such as Honour Gombami, Dazy Kapenya and Gilbert Banda all have houses in the sprawling surburb. Saunyama however said company-backed teams are the most financially stable on the local scene. Be that as it may, he added, not every player gets the opportunity to play for such teams as FC Platinum, Ngezi Platinum Stars, Chicken Inn, Black Rhinos and other well funded teams. “Whilst not all players will play for the company-backed teams, which pay well and are most stable, those playing for traditional giants such as Dynamos, Caps United or Highlanders can also make the most of the platforms that these teams present. Without doubt, these teams no longer pay competitively, nor do they offer certainty or guarantees as far as wages and bonuses are concerned in comparison to company-backed teams. However, there are advantages associated with playing for those clubs — as a consequence of the following and interest they generate. Many people are willing to help. For example, whilst I was at Dynamos, I was fortunate to be offered an opportunity to study with the Chartered Institute of Customer Relationship Management free of charge by Doctor Khosi. I understand, however, that mine is not the classic case of the average footballer, as I got my college degree from the National University of Science and Technology just as I was turning professional,” said Saunyama. He said it didn’t have to be an opportunity to study, as it could be a job opportunity after retirement or a business opportunity for some players. Saunyama also challenged players to make the most of their thriving careers and prepare for life after football. “As a fellow professional, I have attended workshops organised by the Footballers Union of Zimbabwe where I learnt many useful things that I believe added to my skills set. I cannot stress enough the importance of life planning in a career that is capped,” Saunyama said.