The Chronicle Melissa Mpofu, Showbiz Editor It took Jah Prayzah 10 years to get 100 000 subscribers on his YouTube page and likely, it took that long as he was not consistent with producing music videos. He only started being consistent in recent years after he collaborated with videographer Vusa Blaqs and the two started producing quality works which brought traffic to Jah Prayzah’s YouTube channel. Commending him for his efforts, one of the world’s biggest online video-sharing platforms, YouTube this week presented Jah Prayzah with a Silver Creator Award. The award is given to those who pass 100 000 subscribers on their YouTube accounts. Those who reach 1 million subscribers are presented with a Gold Creator Award and for 10 million subscribers, one is presented with a glittering Diamond Creator Award. While celebrating the 100 000 subscribers’ milestone this week, Jah Prayzah also informed his fans that his music videos had reached the 1 million mark. Looking at the graph he posted of the YouTube views, it showed that his viewership started rising in 2016/17 when he released videos off the Mdhara Vachuaya and Kutonga Kwaro albums. This is when he made his mark with the Watora Mari video that was directed by Nic Roux and featured Tanzania’s Diamond Platnumz. Thereafter he was unstoppable, with views for his video shooting up to a million this year following the release of videos from his latest Hokoyo album. As the views were going up, some were subscribing to his channel so as not to miss any of his videos and now their subscribers are over 250 000.  No wonder why Blaqs this week posted saying he misses giving speeches at awards because with such recognition of their efforts, no two ways, Blaqs deserves awards, and not just local ones.  Commenting on his achievement, Jah Prayzah said this was a dream come true for him. “This is a dream come true. I still dream bigger, but for what I have achieved so far, I say thank you to you my fans and YouTube for giving us the platform. Last but not least, thank you to God the Almighty for the talent among other blessings,” posted Jah Prayzah on his Facebook page while holding the YouTube Silver play button/award.  Impressed by their artiste, fans of Jah Prayzah took to his social media accounts to congratulate him. Most also took that time to reminisce about their musician’s music journey. “Wooow, well-done Jah Prayzah, you deserve it. I remember my first time seeing you was at a show at Jazz 105 when I was pregnant. You were the first act before Sulu and you sang with so much zeal like the place was filled up. “Honestly, you could see this was a star in the making. Now you’re up there and we’re enjoying every step of your success. Pamberi nekutifadza Mukudzei. Your music blesses my soul,” commented one Rejoice Mafunga on Facebook.  “We love your lyrical content. Your expression in Shona made me personally fall in love with the language even more. You are a force in the music industry. “We love what you give us, wakaramba wakadai, we will keep supporting your music. Well deserved Jah,” commented another, Samantha Tsoto.  Commented Ethel Sajeni: “Well done JP, you deserve it, the hard work and perseverance that you have showed in this journey is just amazing. Keep on delivering the best and we’ll keep on supporting you 100%.”      