The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
A HIGH ranking Ministry of Finance and Economic Development official issued a directive that US$1 million from funds meant for the 2014 African Union Sports Council Region 5 Under-20 Youth Games that were held in Bulawayo be diverted to construction works at Mutange and Tokwe Mukosi dams in the Midlands and Masvingo provinces respectively. The money was paid to a Chinese company Nanchang Engineering. Fidelis Ngorora, a director of public sector investment programme in the Finance And Economic Development Ministry issued the directive on May 27, 2014, through a letter addressed to Wilbert Mubaiwa, who was the director of projects implementation at the Infrastructure Development Bank of Zimbabwe. This is contained in a 75-page forensic audit report by Deloitte and Touche on the 2014 Games that Chronicle Sport is in possession of. “The instruction letter was issued by Fidelis Ngorora, director Public Sector Investment Programme in the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development in a letter dated 27 May, 2014, to Wilbert Mubaiwa, director Projects Implementation, Infrastructure Development Bank of Zimbabwe. According to the letter, treasury was to repay the money during the same week it was diverted. At the reporting date the money had not been repaid,” reads the Deloitte and Touche report. The audit was ordered by Cabinet on May 17, 2016, after fears of looting of State resources by government officials working in cahoots with some members of the local organising committee and contracted service providers were raised. The report also shows that over US$100 000 was paid in travel and subsistence allowances with no supporting documentation. According to the report, Government availed US$11 005 000 for the sport and infrastructure refurbishment and US$3 822 120 for operational expenses, but was not satisfied with some amounts paid and owed to contractors in comparison to actual work done. The auditors examined the local organising committee payment vouchers and noted that subsistence payments made to security personnel amounting to US$105 899.50 were not adequately supported. “This made it difficult for us to verify the actual beneficiaries and the authenticity of the claims. These allowances were claimed and collected by a representative of each of the group,” the report notes. The audit also revealed the disappearance of photo finish equipment that was installed at White City Stadium in Bulawayo ahead of the 2014 AUSC Youth Games . “Photo finish equipment previously installed at White City Stadium was subsequently removed, the location of which has not been ascertained. There is no record of who authorised its removal,” wrote the auditors.