The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
CONSULTATION meetings between the leadership of Zifa affiliates and clubs set for Saturday will mark the beginning of Zifa’s constitutional review gatherings that will run up to July 19. Zifa has invited its affiliates and stakeholders to the meetings aimed at gathering views and information that will be used by the committee in its constitutional review mandate. The review is meant to align the Zifa constitution with Fifa’s guiding document. Zifa recently unveiled the review committee consisting of chairman Kelvin Musimwa, vice-chairman Stanley Chapeta, Martin Kweza, Highlanders chairman Kenneth Mhlophe, Simon Simango, Beaullar Musara, Wilbert Simba, Gilbert Saika and Mehluli Thebe. The meetings will be held in four Zifa regions, Northern, Central, Southern and Eastern. The Northern Region meeting is set for Prince Edward High School on July 4, starting with women football affiliates in that region and provinces. The second session of the Northern Region meeting will feature teams from Division 1 and 2, Harare Province, Mashonaland West Province, Mashonaland West Province, Northern Region Area Zone, Naph, Nash, Beach Soccer and Futsal. On July 4, the Central Region will also hold a meeting at Gweru ZRP main camp featuring Central Region Division One teams as well as provincial teams from Midlands and Matabeleland South. Area Zones, Naph, Nash,  Beach Soccer and Futsal will attend all regional consultative meetings. The Southern Region outreach will be held on July 11 at the Bulawayo Small City Hall and will be attended by open to First Division clubs and teams from Matabeleland North and Bulawayo Province. The Eastern Region meeting is also scheduled for July 11 at Utopia Guest House in Mutare. The Women’s Soccer League outreach meeting will be held at Harare Gardens on July 18. The Premier Soccer League will later on the same day hold its meeting at Prince Edwards in the afternoon. The last episode of the consultative meetings is set for Prince Edwards in Harare on the morning of July 19 and Zifa has invited other stakeholders such as FUZ, the media, sports medicine experts, Zimbabwe Soccer Legends, Zimbabwe National Soccer Supporters Association and Friends of the Warriors. The deadline for written submissions is July 21.