The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
BULAWAYO-based gospel artiste, Sikhulile “Skhue” Sibanda who has been vending for the past five years in order to fend for her family, realising the influence she has, has decided to help those who are suffering due to the Covid-19 pandemic by buying groceries for them. The 30-year-old artiste who has not had it easy in life as she was forced to drop out of school after her father was shot and injured by armed robbers in 2009, said she knew how it felt to suffer, hence she wants to assist others. She said as a result of the fateful event, she had to venture into shop keeping before ultimately setting up a vegetable market in 2015. Now, she runs a firewood business. “In 2009 when my dad was shot by armed robbers, I stopped going to school. By then, I had to find a job in shops and I moved from one shop to another before I decided to order some stuff for resale in 2015. Up to today, that’s what I’m still doing and I’ve been able to help my family through this business. “However, I realised that a lot of people are starving as they cannot afford to put food on the table so I’ve decided to purchase groceries for them from the firewood proceeds. I’m also giving out firewood for free at funerals,” said Skhue. Other than donating goods to people, Skhue said she is also offering counselling services. “I also have online platforms where I assist people through counselling. We all have a rough patch in life and with the lockdown, I’m also focusing on addressing women abuse. “I’m doing all of this because of the love and unity that I have seen in my home, that I want to see out there,” said Skhue. Turning to her music career, Skhue said she broke the ice when she was a backing vocalist for Vusa Mangena. “I was spotted by Gospel Addicts stable members during a concert here in Bulawayo when I was backing Vusa Mangena. From then on, I started working with the guys until I dropped my album in November 2018.” The six-track gospel album titled A Prayer Away featured Guidance Mugayi on the track Ndomuteera Muponesi. – @mthabisi_mthire.