The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
TOUCHED by reports that Bulawayo City FC players haven’t been paid since the beginning of the year, a local businessman Amkela Nyoni yesterday donated $80 000 to the club. City are one of many clubs that are financially struggling, as their backers were affected by Covid-19. When the Covid-19 lockdown started in March, City were on the verge of sealing a deal with Ingwebu Breweries. Nyoni, managing director of Genstorm Global Supplies, which specialises in mining equipment, donated $40 000 and 30 soccer balls to City in March. “When I heard that the club is in dire need of assistance, I felt that as a company we have to assist them. Businesses are also struggling due to Covid-19, but with the little we have, let’s try and assist the clubs. There are a number of football clubs dotted around Bulawayo that are playing a critical role in giving youngsters hope and keeping them busy by playing soccer instead of engaging in criminal activities. These clubs deserve the support of local businesses and if we don’t assist them, there is a danger that these youngsters might end up doing wrong things. These senior footballers give hope to upcoming stars and if we neglect them, we might lose them,” said Nyoni. “I’ve done my part by assisting Bulawayo City FC and I trust it will go a long way in helping the club. When I gave them balls, I promised that I’d be around to walk along with them as they return to the Premiership, hoping that they won’t be relegated this time around. I’m walking with them and hope more businesses will assist them,” he said. City chairman Jerry Sibanda said the donation came at the right time. “We’re grateful to our all-weather friend Nyoni and his company for the timely donation. It’s not a secret that we’re in need of assistance and with games suspended we’re also feeling the heat,” said Sibanda. The club’s vice-chairman Zenzo Moyo said: “It’s difficult to approach council for assistance because the local authority is also struggling to pay its employees, with reports that they’re paying them half salaries. As an executive of the club, we should all stand up, use our contacts to help the boys. “We’re lucky to have friends like Nyoni and appreciate his help. If we have more people like Nyoni helping other teams, then all the players will have a cushion. We’re not the only ones needing assistance, all clubs need help so that players are able to provide for their families during these difficult times.” — @ZililoR