The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Business Correspondent
THE National Railways of Zimbabwe (NRZ) says it is witnessing an increase in volumes of freight it is moving since the easing of lockdown regulations under level 2. In an interview after the donation of six drums to be used by Bulawayo’s United College of Education (UCE) to store fuel required by the college which is also a quarantine centre, NRZ public relations manager, Mr Nyasha Maravanyika, said business was on a positive trajectory following the easing of lockdown regulations. He said soon after Government announced relaxing of lockdown regulations under level 2, NRZ started recording increased business as most companies resumed operations. “The month of May has been good for us because many companies had resumed operations and engaged us to move their goods to different places. This has seen us move 234 161 tonnes of cargo compared with the previous month’s 141 158 tonnes,” said Mr Maravanyika. In January the parastatal moved 149 069 tonnes of cargo and February recorded a drop to 136 205 tonnes which was atrributed to rains disruptions. “In March we had an increase as we moved 147 806 tonnes of cargo and in April the figure again dropped to 141 158 tonnes due lockdown restrictions which resulted in many companies suspending production,” he said. Mr Maravanyika said as part of its corporate social responsibility, NRZ was contributing to the fight against Covid-19. He said the parastatal had already spent RTGS$5 million on programmes to mitigate the effects of Covid-19 on communities and its workers. “Recently we moved for free 30 tonnes of rice from Bulawayo to Plumtree and the rice was distributed in Bulilima West constituency,” he said. Mr Maravanyika said NRZ bought Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and medicines for use by workers and its communities that include Rugare in Harare, Westgate in Bulawayo, Dete, Hwange, Rutenga, Chiredzi and Masvingo. He said the parastatal has also offered free transport for all Covid-19 consignments within the country as part of its contribution to fighting the pandemic. — mthabisi_mthire.