The Chronicle Fungai Muderere, Senior Sports Reporter
AT a time most local football teams are feeling the financial strain caused by the Covid-19 lockdown, Chicken Inn secretary-general Tavengwa Hara has lauded their sponsor, Simbisa Brands, and partners for steadying the GameCocks’ ship. The pandemic has negatively impacted on the global economy and owing to the indefinite lockdown that was announced by the Government, a number of Castle Lager Premier Soccer League teams are facing financial challenges. The 2020 season should have started at the end of March and with the majority of local teams reliant on gate-takings for their day-to-day running, the inactivity has placed them in difficulties. Caps United players almost manhandled club vice-president Nhamo Tutisani at his offices in Harare after a fallout over unpaid salaries. The players and the Harare businessman exchanged harsh words and insults after the players confronted him demanding their outstanding dues. Highlanders who, just like Caps United, were ditched by their sponsor NetOne, have taken out their begging bowl in a bid to stay afloat waiting for the 2020 season to kick-off. Chicken Inn have relatively been fortunate that their backer, Simbisa Brands, and partners Bonvie Medical Aid Scheme, Black Shark and Zibuko Capital have all kept the club stable. “Special mention should go to our sponsor Simbisa Brands and their partners, who have been greatly involved in bringing stability to the team during this Covid-19 trying time. “Our efforts as an executive to lead a peaceful house have been greatly complemented by our sponsor and the club’s partners. “Money will never be enough, but we are happy to say adjustments have been made to cushion our players and the coaches,” said Hara. Bonvie Medical Aid Scheme, Black Shark and Zibuko Capital entered into partnership with the Game Cocks in 2018. The situation has also been relatively peaceful at FC Platinum and Dynamos. DeMbare are enjoying the fruits of a sponsorship deal they entered into with Golden Leaf Tobacco. The Glamour Boys’ sponsor has reportedly adjusted players’ salaries to cushion them from the prevailing economic conditions. During the pre-season, Chicken Inn, FC Platinum and Dynamos went on a player shopping spree to assemble formidable sides capable of challenging for the league championship. — @FungaiMuderere