The Chronicle THE spike in positive cases of Covid-19 in Bulawayo to 60 is a reminder to residents that while the Government has relaxed some lock down conditions, there is still need to religiously adhere to precautionary measures to prevent transmission and spread of the virus. We reported yesterday that a Bulawayo resident succumbed to Covid-19 bringing the country’s cumulative deaths to six. To date, the number of confirmed cases nationwide is 486, recovered 64, active cases 416 and six deaths. Matabeleland South has 46 cases while Matabeleland North has 12 cases. The death of the Bulawayo woman and that of the 60-year-old Gweru woman who also died on Saturday came nearly two months after the country reported a fatality from the disease. The fourth person to die of Covid-19 was an 82-year-old woman from Mashonaland West province, mother to ex-minister Sylvester Nguni who died on April 22. The Bulawayo woman is the second person to die of the global pandemic in the city. The first one was the 79-year-old man who died on April 4 and was the second to die of the pandemic in Zimbabwe. Thirteen of the 60 Covid-19 cases in Bulawayo are nurses from Mpilo Central Hospital who have been put on isolation. According to the Bulawayo City Council, 26 cases that had been recorded in the city by Wednesday were from Hillcrest, Hillside, Kumalo, Emakhandeni, Cowdray Park, Pumula South, Nkulumane, Barbourfields, Lobengula West and Magwegwe suburbs. Bulawayo City Council has since managed to track about 1 356 people who were in contact with some of the infected people. “The city had a total of 60 cases of Covid-19 spread throughout the city in at least 10 suburbs and the two quarantine centres. At least 662 which is 48,8 percent of the contacts have been cleared having completed 21 days either without symptoms or and testing negative by antigen tests,” said Bulawayo Mayor Councillor Solomon Mguni in a statement. Clr Mguni said there is still need to re-emphasise implementation of preventive measures such as cough etiquette, hand hygiene, routine temperature checks, wearing masks in public and social distancing to break the chain of transmission. On Sunday, the acting Mpilo Central hospital chief executive officer Dr Solwayo Ngwenya posted on Twitter warning members of the public that relaxing on precautionary measures could cause a rapid spread of Covid-19 that could lead to massive deaths within weeks. It is important to remember therefore that the relaxation of some of the lock down regulations does not necessarily mean that members of the public should also relax in terms of preventing transmission and spread of Covid-19. Instead, there should be more vigilance especially during the winter season where many people are prone to respiratory diseases including Covid-19. Comparatively, Zimbabwe, despite limited resources due to the punitive illegal sanctions imposed on the country in the last two decades, has done very well in managing the Covid-19 crisis and it is the duty of every member of community to complement the Government’s efforts in combating the spread of the virus by staying safe. Those with no business necessitating them to move around are encouraged to stay at home and avoid any unnecessary movements. It is through collaborative efforts that the spread of Covid-19 can be managed so that the virus does not claim anymore lives. No cure has been found so far for Covid-19 and the only available way to protect oneself from the virus is adhering to the prescribed preventive measures. To those whose occupation allows them to move from one place to the other, it is important to stay safe so that they do not become carriers of the virus.