The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma/Langalakhe Mabena, Showbiz Correspondents Locals will this weekend be presented with a rare opportunity to watch artistes who are based in neighbouring South Africa perform live. Among these are Berita, urban grooves artiste Nox, Willom Tight and afro-jazz musician Bekezela who will be headlining Kingdom Blue Life Insurance’s sixth anniversary through an online show on Saturday. The gig which will be hosted by comedian Nceku and actress Mbo Mahocs will also see South Africa’s Zahara, Freddy Gwala, Musa, Platform One, Simba CI, Nick Soul and Malawi’s afro soul giant Lawi take to the stage. The celebrations taking place at the Kingdom Blue head office in Sandton, Johannesburg will be streamed live as from 6PM on Kingdom Blue Life Insurance, Zimbo Live and performing artistes Facebook pages. The company’s sales and marketing manager, Admire Mpofu said they chose the diverse line-up as their company operates in a number of SADC countries. “As a company, through the line-up, we wanted to show the diversity and reflect who we are in alignment of our motto that says ‘Providing a Royal Service for everyone’. “We have clients all over SADC and the UK hence we saw it fit to draw artists from these different countries,” said Mpofu. Speaking from his base in South Africa, afro-jazz musician Bekezela said his presence is part of a partnership with the company through his company Bekezela Music. “The line-up is amazing and being part of this celebration is great,” he said. Berita through her manager Eric Gyimah said fans should expect a live feel of songs from her recently released album Songs in the key of love. “Berita will be playing stuff mostly from her latest album and the audience can expect a good vibe,” said Gyimah. Urban grooves artiste Nox who recently collaborated with blazing Master KG said: “I’ll take this opportunity to re-launch my brand on an African platform therefore people should expect a growing Nox in music.” One of the hosts, Nceku through his manager Wisdom Nyathi said he cannot wait for the event as this will be his first time sharing an online platform with fellow artistes since the outbreak of the deadly coronavirus. @mthabisi_mthire 