The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
A NEW talent search named Rap Star Zimbabwe which has been created to unearth hip hop talent in the country is calling on budding and aspiring hip hop artistes to register for auditions. Executive producer of the talent search, Aldrian “Beefy” Harrison, who organises the Zimbabwe Hip Hop Music Awards, said the winner of the search will walk away with US$4 000, a recording deal and a vehicle with auditions set to take place in Harare and Bulawayo. “Auditions will be held in Harare and Bulawayo with budding hip hop artistes being encouraged to register at Kingsville clothing shop in Bulawayo. After registering, they’ll be given an audition date,” said Beefy. He said deadline for registration is July 24 with those from outside Harare and Bulawayo set to register in cities nearest to them. “For example, an artiste in Gweru will audition in Bulawayo. As the show grows, we’ll look at other cities to host more auditions. For the first round of auditions, an artiste will be judged over a freestyle or verse of 16 bars over a chosen instrumental or they could be asked to perform pre-recorded material. “A panel of judges made up of local hip hop gurus will spearhead the auditions and each week, a new guest judge will be introduced to spice up the show,” said Beefy. He said the talent search will help the artistes build their careers. “This platform will open doors for the young musicians in the hip hop line of music. The winning prize is of paramount importance to the musicians because for example, a record deal will then help in their music production and publicity at zero budget on their part. It’s an opportunity of a lifetime.” Those that fail to make it to the second round, Beefy said will be free to audition for a second time. “The idea is to fuse as many hip hop heads in terms of mentorship and adjudication during the show alternating all the big stars and hip hop influencers to give value for money and to maintain the relevance of the culture by channelling the show in the right direction. “Occasionally, we’ll have none hip hop personalities involved to spice up the show. The judges have a big task at hand as they need to identify the next biggest hip hop/rap act in Zimbabwe.” — @mthabisi_mthire.