The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
BULAWAYO’S hip-hop scene is certainly in safe hands if efforts by the genre’s artistes count for something. The likes of Asaph, Msiz’Kay, Crisswiss and The Dot have been consistently putting the city on the map through their songs such as Like So and Bad Vibes which have been very competitive nationally. Now, there is a new entry in the form of rapper Boy Nino who is promising to further elevate the city’s hip-hop scene through his collaboration with South Africa’s multi-award-winning hip-hop sensation, Emtee on a single due for release next month. The up-and-coming 23-year-old artiste from Kumalo said the single will be part of his three-track EP which he is working on. Boy Nino (real name Nigel Bhebhe) said the collaboration with the Roll Up and Pearl Thusi hit-maker was facilitated by Zimbabwean Patrice Manyathela who manages South African rapper, Saudi. Before going solo, Emtee was part of rap trio, African Trap Movement, alongside rappers Sjava, Saudi and their producer Ruff before they were all signed as solo artistes by Ambitiouz Entertainment. “Through Saudi’s manager, Patrice, I managed to link up with Emtee as he sent him the song which he enjoyed. He then rode on it with his lyrics,” said Boy Nino. Quizzed about the name of the forthcoming track, Boy Nino said it would be unveiled closer to the release date as they want to keep music fans in suspense. “The song will be out in July and at the moment, I cannot say the name. The name will only be revealed a week before the release,” said Boy Nino. He however, said the collaboration with Emtee will likely go a long way in advancing his career. Due to the Covid-19 pandemic that has seen most countries locking their countries, artistes have not been able to go about their business as usual. As such, most have been communicating online and conducting their business online. Also affected by the pandemic, Boy Nino said most of the work on the song was done online with the two artistes communicating online. “We worked nicely via email and managed to come up with the hot track through online communication. The track is part of my EP that will have three songs. I’m glad to say the production is complete now and I’m just working on a few logistics before dishing it out,” he said. His song with Emtee, Boy Nino said will definitely have a video which they are planning to work on once the lockdown restrictions are lifted. Having ventured into the music industry in 2018, Boy Nino has a number of productions, among them a three-track EP titled Perpetual which had songs Dime, Two Player Mode and Wave that featured Kyla Blac. He is known for his single titled Work that was released last year and featured award-winning artiste 2Yung. — @mthabisi_mthire.