The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
THE Hindoo community in Harare and the Rotary Club of Victoria Falls have separately donated blankets and gloves to an old people’s home and two orphanages in the resort town to cushion them during winter. The Hindoo community which incorporates the Muslim group, with more than 6 000 members in the country, also donated blankets to Victoria Falls isolation centre at Zimbabwe Aids Project Clinic. Chinotimba Old People’s Home got 24 blankets while Rose of Charity and Mummy’s Angels orphanages received 10 each, with the isolation centre getting 16. Chinotimba Old People’s Home now has 14 elderly persons after one died last week after a long illness. Victoria Falls businessman Mr Jay Gopal and his wife Mrs Shakuntala Gopal handed over the blankets on behalf of the Hindoo Community in Harare. The donation came after a realisation of the need for blankets by the old people’s home and orphanages during winter. Mrs Gopal said the Hindoo community will always help the needy. “It is the Harare Hindoo society that’s giving the donation as they have always been donating to charity. After donating a fridge to the isolation centre recently, they inquired if there was anything needed and we indicated there is need for blankets for winter for the old people’s home and orphanages,” said Mrs Gopal. Welcoming the donation on behalf of the isolation centre, Mr Martin Mhlanga encouraged other well-wishers to donate to the needy. Rose of Charity founder Mrs Simangele Moyo said the orphanage is facing challenges sourcing food, medication and blankets. “These blankets will go a long way in helping keep kids warm. Covid-19 has turned our situation into a desperate one as well-wishers are no longer able to help. We are no longer getting food and medication donations the way we used to because of the prevailing situation,” she said. Rose of Charity takes care of 79 orphans, 23 of them housed at the orphanage with the rest being taken care of by the home while living in the community. Speaking on behalf of the Hospitality Association of Zimbabwe which coordinates corporate social responsibility by the tourism industry in Victoria Falls, Ms Yvonne Jandles said the industry was always ready to donate to charity despite the challenges brought about by Covid-19. “The home is not closed despite the Covid-19 lockdown. It’s unfortunate a lot of things were put on hold but anyone who wants to donate should approach the home as they need winter items including some mattresses,” she said. Tourism executive Mrs Barbara Murasiranwa handed over knitted knee blankets and gloves to Chinotimba Old People’s Home on behalf of Victoria Falls Rotary Club. She said the Rotary Club will donate to the orphanages.-@ncubeleon