The Chronicle Fungai Muderere, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIFA Bulawayo Province acting chairman Allan Mpofu has praised ambitious Southern Region Division One side Talen Vision for handing out 100 food hampers to players in their Under-13, 15, 17 and Division Three outfits in Bulawayo’s high density suburb of Nkulumane yesterday. The Talen Vision players, who were accompanied by their parents and guardians, each received a food hamper comprising 10kgs mealie-meal, 2kgs of sugar, 2kgs of rice, 750 millilitres of cooking oil, 500 grammes of sugar beans, 1kg salt and 50g of kapenta. “The fact that they thought of recognising the importance of their 12-year-old players means a lot. It’s not every club that will do this and it’s not everyday that will witness such a particular gesture. We thus encourage more local clubs to emulate Talen Vision. Such an initiative cultivates a culture of loyalty and a sense of belonging to these future football stars,” said Mpofu. Chicken Inn captain Moses Jackson, who had accompanied his son Panashe to collect his food hamper, also gave kudos to Vision. “I believe this will go a long way in reducing the burden that these young players and their respective families have been subjected to owing to Covid-19. I hope and pray that their developmental players remain motivated despite these trying times,” said Jackson. Talen Vision’s general manager Mkhululi Mthunzi said their team motto, Akulula Madoda (It’s not easy) gave them the desire to help their feeder sides. “Talen Vision has an obligation to fulfill youngsters’ dreams realising their football dreams. In that regard, our motto says it all that it is not easy, but we have continuously told ourselves that we have a social responsibility. “We will not tire, we have sown a seed and we want to see these players appreciate the fact that through football they can put food on the table. “We hope through this, the players’ parents and guardians will further appreciate that football is no longer a social recreation, but a career,” said Mthunzi. Last season, Talen Vision players got training allowances. While most of their Southern Region Division One counterparts are struggling to remunerate players and coaches due to the Covid-19 lockdown inactivity, Talen Vision players have been continuously receiving their monthly salaries. — @FungaiMuderere