The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Reporter
A group of South Africa-based Zimbabweans from Tsholotsho in Matabeleland North have heeded calls by the Government for diasporans to help fight against the Covid-19 pandemic by donating to six health institutions in the district. Calling themselves Makodola Bridge Group, they donated six infrared thermometers, 100 litres of hand sanitisers and 31 spray bottles to four clinics in the district as well as Pumula Mission Hospital and Tsholotsho District Hospital. The donation, worth thousands of South African rand was handed over to the Tsholotsho acting District Medical Officer (DMO) Doctor Nyasha Tsikira by the Tsholotsho Rural District Council chairperson, Councillor Esau Siwela during a brief ceremony held at Tsholotsho hospital on Friday morning. Cllr Siwela said besides the hospital, the group emphasised that the other donated items will be for Madlangombe Clinic in Ward 12, Sikente Clinic in Ward 10, Mpanedziba Clinic in Ward nine and Pumula Mission Hospital in Ward Seven. In a letter which was read by Cllr Siwela, Makodola Bridge Group said they worked closely with Cllr Gift Nkomo and Cllr Siwela and called upon other councillors in the district to work hand in hand with them as they endeavour to uplift the district. Dr Tsikira thanked the group and said the donation will go a long way in helping fight the pandemic that has to date claimed six lives in Zimbabwe. “I have been sent by the Makodola Bridge group which is based in South Africa and is composed of members from various wards in Tsholotsho. “These guys have been helping people in terms of challenges that they are facing, some of the challenges include sourcing fuel for various clinics to pump water, helping the Rural District Council during the reconstruction of the Makodola bridge in Ward 12,” said Cllr Siwela.
“We then asked for some donations from them to assist in the fight against this pandemic and they made a resolution and bought all these items which we have just handed over.
“They said the equipment must be distributed accordingly and I for one would want to emphasise that we adhere to their wishes. As leaders we really appreciate what they have done in the district, we need to respect such people who are doing such great work for the community. “Thank you so much to these great sons and daughters of Tsholotsho.” Early this month Cllr Siwela said council will soon lobby the Government to have Covid-19 testing kits at Tsholotsho District Hospital.