The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Health Reporter
THE National Blood Service Zimbabwe (NBSZ) has received consumables that will see the bank resuming the collection of blood from all its clinics countrywide. NBSZ recently stated that the supply of blood to health institutions was constrained due to shortage of critical imported consumables such as test kits and blood bags. The challenge which did not mean there was a shortage of blood donors was due to serious funding and procurement challenges which were worsened by the Covid-19 pandemic. According to NBSZ, the procurement of the critical items had been delayed due to logistical challenges caused by international travel restrictions which has led to the scarcity of cargo flights. In an interview, NBSZ spokesperson Ms Ester Massundah said the organisation was on full scale collection of blood countrywide. “We have since received our much-needed consumables which means we are now fully equipped to collect blood. We encourage our donors to come through as we have the consumables and we are ready to provide them with exemption letters as we are an essential service,” said Ms Massundah. She said the country had joined the world in commemorating World Blood Donor Day on Sunday with calls for more donors. The day was set aside by the World Health Organisation to create awareness of the need for safe blood for the benefit of those who require it for survival. This year’s campaign ran under the theme “Safe blood saves lives”. According to Ms Massundah tomorrow has been declared as the National Blood Donation Day. “We are calling on everyone to come out in their numbers and help donate blood from any of our institutions. We still need more blood to save lives and those who need to conduct blood drives in their workplaces can contact so that we facilitate for such,” said Ms Massundah. “We are also grateful for the Seventh-Day Adventist Church which held a collection drive in Bulawayo churches yesterday and helped us collect blood from about 70 people.” — @thamamoe