The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
RADIO lessons for primary school pupils are set to start today, with Government challenging parents and guardians to assist children during home schooling in the face of the Covid-19 pandemic. The rolling out of the radio lessons programme shows Government’s commitment to provide education even during the Covid-19 induced schools closure. Schools prematurely closed on March 24 for the First Term of the year as Government implemented measures to mitigate against the spread of the virus. Schools are set to reopen on July 28 in a phased manner, starting with 2020 examination classes. Preparations for the re-opening of schools are ongoing with learning institutions coming up with measures to prevent the spread of Covid-19. Radio lessons are part of several measures being put in place to ensure that pupils continue learning. Apart from radio lessons, the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education is also in the process of developing emergency learning modules, television lessons and e-learning material for learners to use for a period of six months. The materials will be uploaded on educational platforms and the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education website. Some schools have adopted e-learning. Yesterday, the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education released a radio lessons programme timetable for primary schools. The lessons would be broadcast on Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation (ZBC) stations. In a statement yesterday, the Education Ministry said the radio lessons are part Government’s effort to provide alternative teaching ways during the Covid-19 era and challenged parents and guardians to assist learners. “The Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education in conjunction with ZBC will be rolling out radio lessons as part of alternative learning platform. the first schedule which are for the Primary School level will be aired from 15 June 2020 to 26 June 2020. Thereafter another schedule will be provided. Parents and guardians are advised to familiarise themselves with the schedule so that they assist their children as much as possible,” reads the statement. Early Childhood Development (ECD) lessons will be broadcast on National FM while Grade 3 and Grade 7 pupils will get their radio lessons on Power FM, Classic 263, Radio Zimbabwe and Khulumani FM. Grade 4 to Grade 6 pupils are not covered in the first schedule. However, the radio lessons schedule runs up to next week on Friday before another timetable is announced. The lessons run for between 15 minutes to one hour. According to the schedule, from 9AM to 9:15AM today ECD learners will learn English and Maths and Science from 11AM to 11:15AM while between 10AM to 10.15AM Grade 1 pupils will learn Maths and Science.
Grade 2 pupils will learn Maths and Science between 9.30AM and 10AM. Grade 3 pupils will learn Mathematics from 9.30AM and 10AM and Grade 7 pupils learning English from 11am to 11.30AM and Mathematics at 11.30AM to12PM. Tomorrow at 11am to 11.15am ECD pupils will learn Family and Heritage Studies, on the same day Grade 1 not have lessons while Grade 2 will learn family and Heritage Studies from 2PM to 2.15PM. — @nqotshili