The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
SADC members are in consultations over coordinated Covid-19 response measures that will see returning residents being tested in countries they had been resident in before they migrate to their home countries. This means that Zimbabweans returning from South Africa or Botswana would be tested for Covid-19 in those countries before proceeding to Zimbabwe. Foreigners in Zimbabwe would also be tested in the country before leaving for their home countries. As of Monday, the country had recorded 387 Covid-19 positive cases including 54 recoveries and four deaths with most of the confirmed cases being returnees coming from South Africa and Botswana. This has seen Government placing major focus on Covid-19 testing on returnees who face a mandatory 21 days in quarantine centres before being cleared to go to their families. To scale up Covid-19 testing, Government also intends to conduct random tests on strategically selected populations using the risk-based approach in order to obtain results that are a representation of the population. Addressing a post-Cabinet briefing yesterday Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa said Cabinet observed that only through a coordinated approach could the Sadc effectively contain the spread of Covid-19. “In addition to the strict measures on returnees outlined above, there is a need of enhanced cooperation and coordination with regards to facilitating smooth and orderly transit of Sadc nationals across regional borders. Engagements are underway to ensure that returnees are tested and their status made known to the receiving countries as Zimbabwe recently did with some Malawians that were transiting by bus through Zimbabwe,” said Minister Mutsvangwa. She said Government is also putting in place measures to assist Zimbabweans based abroad who have been affected by the Covid-19 pandemic. “This entails proper identification and needs assessment of beneficiaries as well as determining the most appropriate assistance including assistance at beneficiaries’ own expense,” she said. Minister Mutsvangwa warned teachers who are illegally conducting lessons that their behaviour can expose learners to the deadly pandemic. “However, some teachers are illegally conducting extra lessons in violation of lockdown regulations. Such practices will endanger the lives of the children in question and should be stopped forthwith,” said Minister Mutsvangwa. She said significant progress has been made in evacuating returnees from schools that were used as quarantine centres to pave way for the re-opening of the learning institutions. Minister Mutsvangwa said alternative quarantine centres are being refurbished to cater for the returnees. She said all herbs need to be clinically tested before being administered on patients. “There are no critical active cases in the country. Related to this it is advised that traditional medicines from both local and external sources would be subject to standing approval processes in terms of clinical trials and use by the public,” she said. Minister Mutsvangwa said those in the informal sector should regularise their operations and adhere to Covid-19 prevention measures before reopening. — @nqotshili.