The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
ARTISTES drawn from Matabeleland South Province through Gwanda-based Savuka Arts Association are billed to perform during the online commemorations of the Day of the African Child. The Day of the African Child is commemorated every year on June 16 and was initiated after a student uprising in Soweto, South Africa, where students who marched in protest against apartheid-inspired education, were brutally murdered. This year’s celebrations which will be done virtually worldwide through platforms that include Zoom, will run under the theme “Access to a Child-Friendly Justice System in Africa”. Online shows have been on the rise since the Covid-19 pandemic which has seen public gatherings being stalled and artistes from the capital have been lucky enough to have the backing of hosting the events. This has not been the same case with artistes in the Matabeleland region who do not have the financial muscle. The event will be streamed live tomorrow at 7PM on the Facebook pages of Gwanda Magazine, X Studios Fan page, Khoi Khoi Fan page and Bry Fan page. An array of artistes that include Bolamba Culture Birds, GDA Fire, Master Zhoe, Zhezhingtons, Bry, Khoi Khoi, Skollah, Kadder. Ghetto Smuffs, Good Fellaz, Zagoe Rage, Sbhevara, Prophet Makasi, Reflection Movers and Cutie G, will be hosted by, and will be hosted by Drivo, Mora, Dube and Demed. Savuka Arts Association chairperson Adrian “Drivo” Musa said their event will be held under the theme, “African sons and daughters in solidarity fight against Covid-19”. Drivo said they came together as artistes in Matabeleland to host the online show and keep in touch with their fans. “Matabeleland South artistes drawn from Bolamba Culture Birds, Jahunda Community Arts, X Studios music label, PM Studios and Bhadilah Movement have stood up in these hard times to lift the spirits of the African sons and daughters. “We want to bring back hope through hosting the live music edutainment concert that will be live streamed on social media platforms. In recognition of the Day of the African Child, we are saying our lives have been locked down behind poor African doors as our plans have been jumbled and adjourned until further notice thus the need to gear up and stay focused,” said Drivo. One of the organisers, Bolamba Culture Birds Director Mthabisi Dube said the event is meant to encourage artists from small towns to tap into the rise of online shows. “Through the event, we want to market and encourage upcoming artistes to host their online shows as that is where most artistes are breaking ground during the pandemic. “As the idea behind the event is to celebrate the African child, we want to take the opportunity and make artistes from our province visible,” said Dube. — @mthabisi_mthire.