The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Health Reporter
ABOUT 69 percent of child sexual abuse cases occur in the home and are perpetrated by people who are supposed to protect the minors and are close to them. According to a 2019 Violence Against Children Survey, despite calls for deterrent sentences, the scourge is on the rise in Zimbabwe. These cases could worsen given that many countries including Zimbabwe have imposed lockdowns to fight the spread of Covid-19 which has seen children spending more time at home. Some homes, instead of being safe sanctuaries for children have actually become a theatre of nightmares. Abused children usually become reclusive and with abusers nearby all the time, may struggle to let anyone know their horrible life experiences. In some cases, family members cover up abuse and children run out of options to get assistance. Abuse, experts say, may become a vicious cycle in which victims may grow up to be perpetrators as well. Children, due to lockdown conditions are spending lengthy periods away from school which usually keeps them away sexual predators. Sexual violence is defined as a range of sexual acts against a child including incest, rape, sexual violence in the context of dating intimate relationships, sexual exploitation, online sexual abuse and non-contact sexual abuse. Childline estimates that at least one in three girls and two in five boys are survivors of sexual abuse in Zimbabwe just like in other African countries. In a statement yesterday, the Zimbabwe Association of Church-Related Hospitals said cases of sexual abuse of children and gender-based violence are likely to increase with every advent of a crisis. “About 69 percent of sexual abuse occurs in the home according to the Violence Against Children Survey, 2019. What this means for many survivors however is that they are trapped at home with the abusive partners and family members with little chances of reporting,” read the report. “The fear is that they are trapped in the Covid-19 lockdown unable to leave, escape or reach out for help and in essence, homes are no longer safe havens. Young people are especially vulnerable to sexual abuse and exploitation. All possible steps must be taken to protect children against sexual predators.” In Zimbabwe, policy makers have proposed a mandatory minimum 60-year jail sentence for people convicted of raping minors aged 12 years and below and the disabled while a 40 -year term will apply for all rape cases as part of deterrent measures to stamp out the crime. “Sadly, survivors always call for help and that is where the story ends. According to the VCS 2019 report, 61 percent tell someone about sexual abuse but only 14 percent of survivors access services,” read the statement. “It is everyone’s responsibility to break the silence and protect the word’s future generations. There is need to break the silence of institutions.” The organisation said sexual abuse exposes children to HIV, unwanted pregnancies and increase the likelihood that they will experience other sexual assaults in the future or become abusers themselves. “Prevailing toxic social norms and gender inequalities, economic and social stress caused by the Covid -19 pandemic coupled with restricted movement and social isolation measures, have led to an exponential increase in sexual violence,” said ZACH. “Cases of child sexual abuse are rarely reported because the majority of perpetrators are related to the abuse children,” read the statement. Statistics from the National Aids Council show that the majority of sexual abuse cases in Bulawayo involve children, some aged below five years. The latest quarterly report on Bulawayo states that 59 percent of the total abuse cases reported in the city were from girls aged between 10 and 14 years. “The province recorded more sexual violence cases in the young people in the 10-14 and the 15-19 age groups who make up 59 percent of the total abuse cases. Of particular concern is the number of under-fives who are sexually abused who make up 14.8 percent of the total number of abuse cases reported,” the report said.-@thamamoe