The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
MUCH celebrated artiste DJ Tira is this year celebrating 21 years in the music industry and to mark that milestone, he is releasing an EP on August 24 that will take fans down memory lane. DJ Tira who runs the popular Afrotainment label has not only managed to rise to stardom himself, but has also helped others, chief among them Big Nuz, DJ C’ndo, DJ Fisherman, Dladla Mshunqisi, Zodwa Wabantu and most recently, the Qwabe Twins. Popularly referred to as Durban’s Finest, DJ Tira has collaborated, for the first time, with Zimbabwe’s songstress Berita for a single titled Uyandazi that is expected to serve as a teaser to the forthcoming EP. The track was produced by Mondli Ngcobo who sang the 2017 Inkanyezi hit and recorded at Afrotainment Studios. Speaking from his base in South Africa yesterday, DJ Tira through the Afrotainment artistes’ manager, Senzo Shezi said Uyandazi which will be released tomorrow, is part of the six tracks on DJ Tira’s EP. He said the EP was meant to celebrate DJ Tira’s 21-year career where he has managed to stay on top of the game. Berita, Shezi said was carefully selected to feature on the EP because of her determination in music, something DJ Tira strongly supports. “DJ Tira is currently working on the EP which is titled 21 Years of DJ Tira. It has six tracks with the first single due for release this Friday while the full EP will come out on 24 August. “Berita is one of the youngest and hardworking independent women who love to work and is hungry for success, that’s why DJ Tira chose to work with her on Uyandazi,” said Shezi. Uyandazi, Shezi said is meant to encourage fair treatment of women by their partners. “The song is all about promoting love and respect for our women. We should love them and not just give them material things, but give them time. “Buying them flowers and going on walks by the beach is ideal as it makes them happy and that’s all captured on the song,” Shezi said. Fans who received the news of the single’s release on Tuesday have already described the track as a hit as it has two artistes that are very talented. DJ Tira said his fans, mostly female, are definitely going to love Uyandazi and the songs on the EP. “Fans must expect something that will make them lose their minds, especially ladies as this track (Uyandazi) is just out of the world,” he said. Berita who has been putting in a lot of work into her craft is lucky to have been chosen for a collaboration by DJ Tira as he does not come cheap. The Afrotainment kingpin recently took to social media to let people know how much a DJ Tira feature costs. “For all artistes/DJs who want Chikichikichaaaaaa on their songs…. the price has gone up! R50k. Verse is R70k. Chorus is R100k. Faka imali uzobona! Uzongithola eAfro,” he wrote on his Facebook page. Berita, commenting on the forthcoming track, said she was honoured to have worked with the music great. Detailing the song, she said: “The song is about a woman who’s expressing herself to her partner. She is saying although she loves the finer things in life, she enjoys having a romantic walk and receiving simple gifts such as flowers from her partner. “Basically, with this song, we want to encourage romance in relationships.” – @mthabisi_mthire.