The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau ZIMBABWEANS have resorted to buying vehicles online mostly from car dealers in South Africa after authorities in the two countries closed their borders to non-essential human traffic to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19). Most governments in Sadc, Zimbabwe and South Africa included, are only allowing commercial cargo and remains of their nationals for burials to access the ports of entries. In cases where citizens want to return to their home countries they are doing so with prior arrangements between the sending and receiving nations. So far over 3 500 Zimbabweans have returned home from the neighbouring country through Beitbridge Border Post. In separate interviews, car dealers on the South African said they had witnessed an increase in online purchases of vehicles since people could not travel under the lockdown conditions. In some cases, they said importers were making arrangements with relatives or business associates to pay for the vehicles in that country. Second hand vehicle imports mainly from Japan, UK, Singapore and South Africa are handled at Malindi and Manica Transit shades respectively while new and those falling under the immigrant rebate are done at the border post. However, the clearance of vehicles under the immigrant rebate facilities is currently suspended until the borders open to human traffic. Our Beitbridge Bureau is reliably informed that between 22 and 40 entries (of vehicle imports) are processed at the two centres daily. Prior to the lockdown they were handling between 70 and 100 vehicles imports daily. Major car dealers at the South African border include; Quest Royal, Wright Cars, Car Cade, Murree Motors, Noble Motors, Autonet, Jakes Auto and KDG. A sales manager at Wright Cars, Mr Clemence Mabidi said people were buying mostly commercial vehicles. “We are selling at least 30 to 40 cars daily and most of the payments are done via bank transfers,” he said. “People are buying mostly commercial vehicles like small trucks and pane vans, which they import duty in Zimbabwe in local currency. “Under the current lockdown conditions we don’t having many people coming here because the borders are closed and our clients are using online platforms to buy the vehicles”. Mr Mabidi said their company was also selling some of the vehicles to Mozambicans also using the online platforms. Another car dealer, who preferred anonymity said they were also selling vehicles whose payments was being done through third parties in South Africa. However, official comment could not be obtained from the Zimbabwe Revenue Authority (Zimra) on the exact number of vehicles imported since the start of the lockdown. It costs between US$5 000 for one to import a modest pre-owned vehicle from South Africa and an estimated $8 000 to ship in a standard commercial vehicle. According to Zimra’s standard operations procedures one motor vehicle should be cleared between five and six hours from the time of submission of the requisite and correct documents. This includes three hours for physical examinations, duty calculations and payments and another two hours for the necessary verification and processing of the Certificate of Customs Clearance (CCC).