The Chronicle Melissa Mpofu, Showbiz Editor BET nominee Sha Sha has pleaded with locals to accept and support more genres other than Zimdancehall so as to grow the country’s music industry. She said Zimdancehall which she described as the most preferred genre in the country, has been well received with those who sing other types of music, not getting as much support, something which has seen most having challenges penetrating the local music scene. Because of this lack of support, Sha Sha, a diverse artiste, had to leave the country to pursue her career in South Africa where she got better reception through her Amapiano tracks. “Here in South Africa, because of the Amapiano and house music which people love, I’ve been welcomed in the greatest way. Back at home, they do vibe with me, but it’s not similar to South Africa because SA is a dance nation. “At home, I feel it’s more of Zimdancehall and other genres life Afro,” said Sha Sha. Looking at the trends locally, Zimdancehall, has for the past years, been highly supported with most promoters opting to promote Zimdancehall artistes. This has seen the genre grow immensely with new artistes being churned out almost weekly. Even the lockdown virtual shows that have been initiated online as a result of the ban of public gatherings have mostly been popularising Zimdancehall artistes. Sha Sha however said if people could support other genres like soul/Rnb, popularly referred to as urban grooves, the country’s music industry would grow and even become competitive regionally. Another hurdle which artistes in the country are facing, Sha Sha said is that of lack of support from parents. She urged parents to be more understanding and support their kids career choices or artistic talents if the country is to have a vibrant arts scene. Sha Sha, whose parents discouraged her from pursuing a music career and went to an extent of disowning her, said the country needs brave people who will do whatever it takes to pursue their passion. Although acknowledging the country’s music industry’s significant growth, Sha Sha said she feels it could be way further if some attitudes are changed. “I feel like we (Zim music industry) are still growing. We just need more brave people who won’t be afraid of what their parents will say and pursue their arts careers. There’s a lot of talent back home, but because of the way we’re raised, it’s really hard to step into a scene like that (music) and make it,” said Sha Sha. With the BET voting lines now closed, Sha Sha thanked all those who voted for her ahead of the awards ceremony which is taking place online this coming Monday. “Thank you, guys, for supporting me. You guys have been amazing. The love that you’re all showing me from my singles and music that I featured on is so much and I want to thank you. “For Sha Sha to have this impact and be where I am right now, it’s because of your guys love so I just want to say thank you guys,” Sha Sha said.