The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Court Reporter
A JAILBIRD from Bulawayo’s Matshobana suburb who allegedly fatally stabbed his uncle with a kitchen knife, has appeared in court facing a murder charge. Desmond Phiri (23) allegedly stabbed his uncle Jonathan Phiri (39) in the neck for intervening in a dispute he had with his 70-year-old grandfather Mr Manonoka Mponda over a protection order in December 2018. Phiri who once served in prison for pick-pocketing and robbery, appeared before Bulawayo High Court judge Justice Thompson Mabhikwa. Prosecuting, Mr Kudakwashe Jaravaza said on December 24, 2018 at around 7.40pm, the accused person went to his grandfather’s house in Matshobana. Jonathan who stayed in Entumbane with his family, visited his father, Mr Mponda in Matshobana and found the accused person, who was drunk and holding a beer bottle, at the house. The court heard that the deceased confronted the accused person demanding to know why he had violated a court order. The dispute nearly degenerated into a fight but they were restrained by Rodwell Mponda, the deceased’s younger brother, who intervened by escorting the accused person out of the yard. “The accused person left his grandfather’s house and went to a neighbour’s house where he found a 15-year-old boy washing dishes outside and took a kitchen knife, which was among the dishes,” said Mr Jaravaza. Phiri went back to his grandfather’s house armed with a knife. He waylaid the deceased at the gate and allegedly stabbed him in the right shoulder. The deceased collapsed a few metres away from the gate and died. According to the postmortem, the cause of death was hypovolemic shock, carotid artery lesion and right lung injury and stab wound. Soon after committing the offence, Phiri fled the scene and he was arrested the following day after police found him hiding in a disused National Railways of Zimbabwe (NRZ) wagon. which has turned into a haven for criminals In his defence through his lawyer, Ms Belinda Khupe of Mutatu, Masamvu and Gustavo Law Chambers, Phiri said he acted in self defence during a scuffle. The trial continues on July 27 with four witnesses expected to testify. — @mashnets.