The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
SOME shops in Gwanda are compromising people’s health by failing to sanitise and check their customers’ temperature as part of efforts to prevent the spread of Covid-19. Social distancing is also not being maintained at some premises. A snap survey in the CBD showed that some small shops in the town were not sanitising their clients or checking temperature while others were randomly sanitising clients and not checking temperature. Some shops have mounted water dispensers at their entrances which they have left unattended and some customers do not bother washing their hands. Ministry of Industry and Commerce’s Matabeleland South provincial deputy director, Mr Richmond Ncube said he had noted with great concern that only large shops were adhering to the directive while small shops were not. “Big supermarkets and shops in the town are compliant with the directive as they are sanitising their clients upon entry and checking the temperatures. They are also limiting the number of customers in the shop at each time and they are also encouraging one metre gaps in queues. Even banks and other big institutions are abiding by this directive. “The challenge is there when it comes to small businesses. Some are only sanitising their clients while others are not even sanitising or checking temperature. They have to understand the importance of abiding by these safety measures. The primary reason for these rules is that of saving lives and by complying they minimise the risk of spreading the virus both among their employees and innocent customers. The cost of non-compliance will be much higher if an outbreak is recorded as a result of people’s recklessness.” A manager at a local supermarket who preferred anonymity said they had resorted to mounting a water dispenser by the entrance where customers were expected to wash their hands. He said it was difficult to have someone stationed at the entrance to ensure people wash their hands as that would require someone to be hired for the task as they were short staffed. Traders in small shops said they could not afford to buy sanitisers and thermometers. Those with water dispensers said some clients were refusing to use them saying it was unhygienic as so many hands were touching them. — @DubeMatutu