The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Tinashe “Nash” Mutarisi, founder of Nash Paints is a man locals need to support as he has the capacity to turnaround the country’s arts industry. This is a man who has always been passionate about the music industry as seen by his involvement in the music careers of the likes of Jah Prayzah who he has greatly supported by sponsoring some of his videos. He was also involved in Military Touch Movement, a record label that saw up-and-coming artistes Nutty O and Tahle Wedzinza growing their careers. Nash has, because of his love for music, set up a studio at his Nash Paints offices in Harare which he is using to host virtual shows. Through the virtual show which has since been named Friday Night Live, several artistes are being promoted during the ongoing lockdown. The Friday Night Live show has been held successfully on the Nash TV Facebook page for the past two months with viewers being exposed to various up-and-coming artistes. It has also helped revive careers of musicians like Roki and Tambaoga. The show has also served as a platform to expose artistes to new audiences as it is watched by diverse people from different parts of the world. The other musicians who have performed at the show that is presented by Butterphly, are sungura kingpin Alick Macheso, Freeman, Levels, Fantan, Kikky Badass, Kinnah, gospel gurus the Charambas, Baba Mechanic Manyeruke and Minister Michael Mahendere. The show is also being shown on ZBCtv with Nash paying the broadcaster to air the show so that it is watched by many Zimbabweans. Nash who has diversified his business to include furniture and kitchenware, is doing the same with his virtual shows. Two weeks ago, he decided to spice up the Friday Night Live by including South Africa’s famed afro-pop band Mafikizolo. The move was unfortunately criticised by many locals who suggested that he focus on promoting local acts. To confirm their displeasure, the Facebook live show which usually attracts more than 10 000 views, had about 4 000 people watching Mafikizolo but earlier when Tambaoga was performing, it had the usual 10 000 or more people. Heeding the call by locals to keep the show “local”, Nash this past Friday invited, for the first time on the show, renowned artistes from Bulawayo — Iyasa and Chase Skhuza. This move was commended by many who said they enjoyed watching talent from other parts of the country. Commenting on the Friday Night Live concept, Nash said he was humbled by the support received from locals so far. Nash said there was no benefit for him financially from hosting the shows but all that he wanted was to promote the local music industry. “As Nash TV, we’re definitely going to keep hosting these shows. We’re very much aware that it’s not a business venture but we’ll continue with it. “In terms of the line-up, we’re going to represent Zimbabwe with all its shape and stripes,” said Nash. He said since the concept has been embraced, they are now targeting to reach artistes in the periphery areas of the country. “We’ll feature musicians who represent our heritage, be it Hosiah Chipanga from Mutare and Ndolwane Super Sounds from Bulilima or Mbira Dzenharira. “We will knock on Lovemore Majaivana’s door and plead with Leonard Zhakata to come share their talent with us. “We’re not going to stop playing Bazooka, Tammy, Cal Vin or Van Choga and we promise to do so for years to come because we love Zimbabwe and we are positive about the future.” Commenting on last Friday’s performances, Nash said there is need to honour legendary artistes while they are still alive hence the inclusion of Skhuza. “Nash TV shows reflect the talent we have in Zimbabwe. To be honest, the reason why we took this long to have mudhara Skhuza on the show is only because of our budget as we had to spend more than $60 000 on food and transport. “We can’t talk about the Zimbabwean arts sector and not talk about mudhara Skhuza. We played his music as we grew up,” said Nash while appreciating Skhuza’s performance. “Did you see how the old crooners went through calmly shelling out hit after hit? How the blind guitarist-cum backing vocalist stole the show? Who are we to then deny our children such talent?” Iyasa director, Nkululeko Dube commended organisers of the Friday Night Live for their concept and being all inclusive. “We appreciate the recognition from Nash TV and we hope in this new normal (of having virtual shows), we can surely utilise the digital revolution to our creative advantage,” said Dube. — @mthabisi_mthire.