The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Victoria Falls
AN annual rugby match between Zimbabwe Rugby Legends and South Africa Rugby Legends, which had been set for August in Victoria Falls, has been postponed indefinitely because of the Covid-19 lockdown. Also known as the Zimbo Legends, the Zimbabwean team was supposed to host its South African counterparts on August 8. The annual clash began in 2013 and has become a regular home-and-away fixture on both countries’ rugby calendars, with great matches in the past played at the Elephant Hills in Victoria Falls, Falcon College in Esigodini outside Bulawayo and in Durban. Last year’s edition was held at Growthpoint Kingspark in Durban where the Zimbabwe Legends captained by Steed Richardson and coached by Dave Walters went down to the SA Legends in a curtain raiser match for the Super 14 game between the Sharks and Hurricanes. The tour of Victoria Falls would have been a plus for the resort town’s sports tourism initiatives. Zimbo Rugby Legends Association co-chairperson Gregory Friend said they will be guided by developments with regards to the pandemic. “Preparations were at an advanced stage and the legends were going to do a number of tour activities. The touring SA legends’ activities were to be spread between Zimbabwean and Zambian adventure tour operators for the period 6 to 9 August. The match day was supposed to be 8 August, with the other days dedicated to tourism,” he said. Friend, who is the Zimbo Legends’ scram half, said the teams were going to do rafting, sunset cruise, bungee jumping, safari tours and other activities in Victoria Falls. He said the matches are meant to encourage youths to take rugby seriously, and are also a way for legends to give back to the community. “It is with a heavy heart that this great event has been postponed until further notice and we are using the wait and see method, hoping that once Covid-19 is over we can have it in December. This is an important event because it encourages unity and youths to play rugby. This is one of the greatest all-inclusive sporting activities which doesn’t know race or colour and the legends want to give back to the community. The community also benefits financially through a number of initiatives,” said Friend. Rugby is one of the contact sports that are yet to be cleared by the Sports and Recreation Commission to return to activity. Friend said once cleared, the legends will be all out to inspire youths to want to don the green and white Zimbabwe national rugby team jersey. According to the programme, the legends teams, led by Zimbabwean-born ex-Springbok coach Ian Macintosh, were expected to hold coaching and training sessions for rural primary schools around Victoria Falls. This would have afforded local youngsters an opportunity to meet their rugby heroes and learn about the game as well as enhance community development. — @ncubeleon