The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
PRESIDENT Mnangagwa has donated masks and food to the Zanu-PF Matabeleland South Province Women’s League. Speaking during a distribution of the items at the Zanu-PF party offices in Gwanda on Friday, Zanu-PF Matabeleland South Women’s League chairlady Cde Rona Moyo said they had received 2 000 masks and mealie meal from President Mnangagwa and Zanu-PF Women’s League Secretary Mabel Chinomona. She said the items had been given to members of the women’s league at national, provincial and district level. Cde Moyo said they expected to receive more masks for the rest of the women’s league. “We were called to a meeting as the women’s league leadership where we were given 2 000 masks as a province and 250 bags of mealie-meal by Cde Chinomona. We want to thank our President Cde Mnangagwa who made this possible as he gave Cde Chinomona the fabric to produce these masks,” she said. Cde Moyo said said the donation is supposed to benefit all members of the women’s league. “These masks should benefit our members in the women’s league right up to district level including those in rural areas. The mealie- meal we received will also go a long way to assist families that have been severely affected by food shortages as a result of this Covid-19 pandemic,” she said. Cde Moyo appealed to the National Women’s League leadership to ensure that more masks were handed over to the province so that women at all levels received them. In an interview during the distribution exercise, Zanu-PF National Women’s League representative for Matabeleland South Province Cde Tambudzani Mohadi said the assistance will go a long way in helping women at grassroots level. She said there was also need for the women’s league to extend assistance to the rest of the community. “Women in the communal areas don’t have means to make their own masks. Wearing of masks has been identified as one of the means to curb the spread of this pandemic and hence it’s important for people to have these masks. With this distribution we realised that charity begins at home and we started with women from the party and then go beyond,” she said. Cde Mohadi said the pandemic had brought suffering to women in the province. She said women in rural areas rely mostly on farming as a source of livelihood and they recorded poor harvest this farming season due to poor rains. She said the pandemic had therefore worsened the situation. — @DubeMatutu