The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
MANCHESTER United legend Dwight Yorke has bemoaned the lack of black managers in major European leagues such as England, Spain and Germany. In a candid interview with the British media, the 49-year-old Trinidad and Tobago national said it was disheartening to live with the fact that retired white players were easily finding their way into management positions, while their black counterparts did not enjoy the same privilege. He revealed the frustration he endured when he applied for a management job at Aston Villa, saying he was never even called for an interview despite being highly recommended by Sir Alex Ferguson. However, the former Manchester United manager also stands accused of making a racial decision when he settled for Frenchman Eric Cantona instead of the late Adam Ndlovu, who had made the grade after a one-month trial stint with the Red Devils. “I applied for two jobs, but I didn’t even get a response after putting my CV in and having someone like Sir Alex Ferguson ready to give me a recommendation I couldn’t even get a response let alone an interview. So let’s call it for what it is, let us just be real to the situation. We are looking in the Premier League, is there any black manager at this present time, the answer is no, let’s go more global in Spain, the answer is still no, same as Italy, Bundesliga in Germany. “The fact that there are so many black players in the game you would think that none of us want to get in, but let the people be told they are people who will be fast forwarded into management. I am not saying that is wrong, I am just saying the system is not being fair towards black players or black people who are trying to become manager,” said Yorke. Whilst some EPL players that retired well after Yorke are not into full time management, former players like Mikel Arteta, who retired in 2016, is now in charge of the Arsenal dressing room, Frank Lampard called time on his playing career in 2016 as well and in 2018 he was already in charge at Derby County before landing the top job at his former club Chelsea in 2019. Ex-Liverpool inspirational skipper Steven Gerard also quit active playing in 2016 and is now managing top Scottish outfit Rangers. “I can even go further and say look at the backroom staff, I mean in 20 years I have played football professionally at the highest level I remember coming across one black person in the backroom staff and he was only a misuse. When a black person is going for any title job he is not seen as adequate or qualified so there is this stereotype that black people are lazy, they don’t work hard enough. “The injustice is just not fair; let’s give people a chance. Around the world there are no black managers, you tell us that we have no qualifications, someone told me that I don’t have experience, where am I going to get experience from if no one is employing you? “We have seen people being fast forwarded to jobs with no experience whatsoever so you get a little bit upset when you see these things happening,” said Yorke.