The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo, Health Reporter
THE Department of Social Welfare in Matabeleland South is looking for foster parents to help a 63-year-old Figtree man care for his four children, the youngest being 10 months old. Mr Phumuza Gumede lost his wife who bled to death after delivering their youngest child, Luvuyo last year in July. The 10-month-old baby became an overnight sensation last week after his father was spotted pushing him in a wheelbarrow while doing menial errands. He received support from around the world after his pictures circulated on Twitter, Facebook and WhatsApp. Luvuyo also got a donor who will sponsor his education from primary school to university, through Qoki Ndlovukazi Community Group, an organisation run by Zimbabwean women living abroad which donated food, money and offered to pay a carer for the family. The boy is still under the custody of Figtree Councillor Mr Felix Ncube as social welfare officials and the police are searching for a suitable person to look after him. A couple which had been identified to help Mr Gumede was disqualified after it emerged that the man had a previous conviction of physically abusing his wife. In an interview, provincial social welfare officer Mr Chriswell Nyakudya said baby Luvuyo and his siblings were safe. “I received a report from our officer in Plumtree and it says the child is still with the Councillor, a trained foster carer whom we identified. We are still doing our investigations on the matter and we will review arrangements for this baby as time goes on and when we find a permanent carer,” said Mr Nyakudya. The family’s lawyer Mr Zibusiso Ncube from Ncube and Partners said the ideal foster parents should be willing to move to Figtree where Mr Gumede stays. “Investigations are still on and the committee responsible for Luvuyo’s welfare is now searching for a potential carer, preferably a couple. As stated before, Qoki Ndlovukazi Community Group promised to pay for the carer and help the family with many other things and the position is still the same” said Mr Ncube. “We are hoping that the perfect foster parents will be found soon so that Luvuyo is reunited with his father and siblings so they start living normally as a happy family.” A builder by profession, Mr Gumede (63) had been feeding his son on cow’s milk until the donors came on board last week. Luvuyo stayed at Plumtree District Hospital for a month before social welfare officials formalised that he be put under his maternal aunt’s care in Cowdray Park suburb in Bulawayo. His aunt allegedly dumped him in Figtree where Mr Gumede is renting a house under construction. This left Mr Gumede with no option but to nurse and nurture his youngest son. — @thamamoe