The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIFA Bulawayo Metropolitan province board members have resigned en masse in protest over the national association’s decision to reinstate suspended chairman Francis Ntuta, who was facing allegations of financial misdemeanour. Ntuta was suspended last year by his board after allegedly paying himself $1 020 without the board’s knowledge. The provincial board held an emergency meeting yesterday where acting chairman Allan “Ripper” Mpofu, Otrick Siziba, Charles Ndlovu, who is responsible for finance, and Madza Takawira, who heads the development portfolio, all stepped down, leaving John Mutero as the sole board member. Mpofu said they are not abandoning clubs, but their principles don’t allow them to work with someone whose image is tainted and hasn’t been cleared of pilferage allegations. Members of the provincial board are questioning how the Zifa national board cleared Ntuta without the matter going for a disciplinary hearing. They argued that an inquiry was supposed to be conducted and Ntuta put to his defence. “They never asked us for any information or documentation. Bank statements are there as proof of money transferred to his account and minutes of a resolution made that no money can be withdrawn without the approval of the board or quorum. He disregarded what was agreed on and went against corporate governance ethos. “We’re not being personal, but surely how can one initiate a requisition, approve it , authorise and then transfer public money into his own account? At the AGM, how are we supposed to defend such fraudulent action to the assembly,” read a board statement. Zifa chief executive officer Joseph Mamutse on Wednesday instructed the provincial board to reinstate Ntuta, with his case set to be dealt through summons. Zifa further directed the provincial board to engage an independent auditor to examine their books. The disgruntled provincial board members alleged that some Zifa Southern Region board members (names supplied), who attended an unsanctioned national meeting a fortnight ago in Kwekwe, and a Zifa executive committee member (name supplied) are bent on controlling Bulawayo, with Mpofu and his crew deemed threats to their quest. — @ZililoR