The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
Australia-based artiste, songwriter, producer and mentor, Audius Mtawarira who has been acknowledged for mentoring BET Awards nominee Sha Sha has said local artistes need to work on producing content that is exportable if the country is to record more success stories like Sha Sha. In a recording that is doing the rounds on social media, Audius who is known for hits If Only You Knew and Amai among many others, singled out the likes of Sha Sha, Tammy Moyo and Bryan K as artistes who are producing music that is exportable. “There are so many artistes out there, Sha Sha, Bryan K, Shashl, Tammy, Takura, Adrian Tate and producers like Simba Tagz who have taken a more international or outside Zimbabwe approach to their craft. Not that I’m saying there’s anything wrong with what’s happening inside Zimbabwe, but we need to make our content/products exportable and that way, people will take what’s happening (music industry) in Zimbabwe more seriously,” Audius said. He urged locals to support such artistes as they have the potential to put the country’s music on the scene, thereby putting the country on the spotlight. “When we find individuals who are going out there to do the best they can, we need to support them loudly so that there can be more attention on what’s actually happening in Zimbabwe. “That way, there can be an opportunity to influence those outside the country about the music industry within the country.” Support seems to be a challenge in the country because when people were urged to vote for Sha Sha for the BET nomination, some were reluctant saying they do not relate with her as she is based outside the country. Audius, one of the greatest RnB (urban grooves) singers and songwriters to come out of Zimbabwe became a household name in 2002 with the release of his debut album, Audius, which had the If Only You Knew hit. From back in the day, Audius was always different from the rest as his music was unique as it had an international touch. No wonder why he went on to compose songs for international musicians like Flo Rida, Ludacris and Australia songstress Delta Goodrem. 