The Chronicle Michael Magoronga,Midlands Correspondent
KWEKWE City Council requires about US$3,7 million to fund urgent rehabilitation works at its Dutchman’s Pool water treatment plant to enhance pumping efficiency. The plant supplies water for domestic and commercial use in Kwekwe as well as neighboring Redcliff. Senior officials and stakeholders from the two local authorities toured the facility on Wednesday where it emerged that only four out of nine pumps were operational. Apart from broken-down infrastructure the plant also needs an inlet and desluge valves, filter beds, multistage pump, baffles dishes as well as the rehabilitation of a recycling unit in order to minimize non-revenue water. The delegation resolved to come up with a taskforce that will spearhead resource mobilization and to see to it that the plant is rehabilitated in time. Acting Kwekwe Town Clerk, Dr Lucia Mnkandla, said collective effort was needed to address the challenge, adiding that Kwekwe City was already struggling to satisfy its needs and those of Redcliff due to an increase in population, which has strained pumping capacity. “We have to ensure this plant is working. As Kwekwe we saw the need for us to invite our Redcliff colleagues as well as other stakeholders to put heads together because the demise of the plant means there is no business in the town,” she said. Dr Mnkandla said adequate water supply was critical as the country fights against the spread of the global pandemic, Covid-19. Kwekwe’s director of works, Engineer John Mhike said out of the four operational pumps, three were not working adequately and this affects pressure on taps. Finance director, Mrs Rejoice Maweni said although the local authority had received ZW$10 million devolution funds, the money was not enough. “We received devolution funds as stipulated but it’s not enough to solve our water challenges. We are embarking on a drive to raise funds to ensure that our plant continues operating,” she said. The council is also owed a lot of money by companies. “Redcliff Municipality owes us $16,8m. Ziscosteel $16,6 and Lancashire Steel owes us $4,1 million. At the same time, we also owe Zinwa and ZESA, a situation, which leaves us between a hard place and a rock,” she said. The local authority needs about $5 million for the purchase of water chemicals per month. Redcliff Town Clerk, Mr Gilson Chakauya, pledged full support for the refurbishment project and quickly proposed an urgent stakeholders meeting. The treatment plant draws water from Sebakwe Dam.