The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Government has availed $20 million to the sports and arts sectors as part of the Covid-19 stimulus and recovery package. Sports and arts have been on halt since the end of March when Government enforced a lockdown as part of efforts to contain the spread of the pandemic that has devastated the global economy as well as the sporting and arts industries. Although sport is gradually returning in developed countries, albeit without fans, Zimbabwe is still among countries treading cautiously to ensure safe environment is in place before resuming most sporting activities. Ministry of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation permanent secretary Thokozile Chitepo said the stimulus package was part of the broad package launched by President Mnangagwa when he announced a rescue package for other sectors such as mining and agriculture. Chitepo had accompanied Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation Deputy Minister Tino Machakaire to the ministry’s Covid-19 awareness Youth Relief Fund at Mhlahlandlela Government Complex at the weekend. “When His Excellency the President launched the stimulus and recovery package for all sectors, among that list of different sectors were funds allocated for athletes and artistes. A total of $20 million was put aside and we are just about to finalise the funding and I think within the next week or two we will be ready for disbursement. We are setting up the terms, slightly different from those of the youths because of the different sectors. In sports it will depend on different grades and levels that the athletes would have reached. Money is available and we are confident we might actually get more,” said Chitepo. All sports were affected and forced to ground operations as a result of the lockdown. The forced shutdown of competitions had a serious knockdown effect on a number of associations and clubs, especially football clubs as some like Highlanders and Caps United lost sponsorship. The two teams’ principal sponsor, mobile network operator, NetOne, pulled out saying it was now directing energy towards helping the Government fight the Covid-19 pandemic. Secretary-general of the Rainbow Amateur Netball League, Moses Gukurume, recently said they feared losing their $11 million sponsorship from Glow Petroleum due to inactivity. Some non-contact sports deemed to be low risk have since been allowed to resume and canorganise competitions under strict health guidelines. Government has said it will continue to monitor the sporting activities to ensure full compliance to Covid-19 regulations.