The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIFA will next month receive its first tranche of the US$1 million from world football governing body Fifa, as part of the Covid-19 relief fund. The funds are part of the US$1,5 billion that the Fifa Council unanimously approved during its virtual meeting on Thursday and will see each of the 211 Fifa member associations receiving grants. The first US$500 000 is set to come next month and the second tranche in January next year. Fifa said an additional grant of US$500 000 will be allocated for women’s football. Over and above the grant, Fifa said member associations will be able to apply for interest free loans amounting to 35 percent of their audited annual revenues and in the spirit of solidarity, a minimum loan of US$500 000 and a maximum of US$5 million will be available. Both grants and loans can be directed by member associations to the wider football community in their respective territories, including clubs, players, leagues or others that have been affected by the pandemic that has paralysed football and sport in general the world over. In order to ensure effective oversight of the plan, there will be strict controls of the funds, audit requirements as well as clear loan repayment conditions. A Fifa Covid-19 relief plan steering committee will also be established to supervise administration of the scheme. The committee will be led by Fifa’s governance committee deputy chairperson Olli Rehn. In a circular to member associations, Fifa said the relief plan has been established in order to alleviate the financial distress caused by the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and as such funds available within stage three of the relief plan should be used for relevant losses that have been incurred or are expected to be incurred as well as to address needs that have arisen or are envisaged to arise as a result of Covid-19. “Areas in which funds provided within stage three can be used include, but are not limited to, the following provided they have been adversely affected by Covid-19: the restart of competitions across all categories (where the sanitary situation and government policy permit), the implementation of return to play protocols, including testing, the participation of national teams of all age categories in restarted competitions, the payment of staff costs and hiring of essential staff where necessary the maintenance of football infrastructure as well as payment of general administration and operating costs. Where Covid-19 related losses and needs have been addressed, member associations have the option of using the funds to mitigate need within the wider football community such as making payments to clubs or other stakeholders. Disbursement should be directed only where the subsequent recipient has clearly demonstrated to be in need and principles of transparency and non-discrimination should be applied,” said Fifa in its circular to member associations.