The Chronicle Business Reporter
STANBIC Bank Zimbabwe chief executive officer, Mr Joshua Tapambgwa,  says Africans must be excited about the future and become change makers in order to make dreams possible. “We must be inventive, bold, curious, knowledgeable and responsive,” he said while launching a new brand line for the bank, which is aimed at expressing a commitment to assisting customers realize their dreams. The bank has pledged to be a financial partner through working with different stakeholders to make dreams come true. Its new tag, “It can be done”, was launched yesterday in a series of online videos on social media and a new press campaign. Speaking in one of the launch videos, Mr  Tapambgwa, said the new brand positioning by Standard Bank Group, parent company to Stanbic Bank Zimbabwe, was driven by their aim to help fellow Africans achieve their dreams. “For the past 10 years we have been supporting clients in moving forward, and now we believe it is time to make the leap and facilitate the realisation of dreams. “As a financial partner with a focus on Africa, our goal is to realise the potential in every African dream. Achieving your dreams could be the igniter of another’s and that is how we drive Africa’s growth”, said Mr Tapambgwa. The Standard Bank’s subsidiary holds a strong investment banking portfolio, which has seen major deals in power, telecommunications, mining and agricultural sectors in Zimbabwe come to light. Mr Tapambgwa said it was the bank’s priority to continuously strategize around the customer’s long-term goals and needs, including providing the necessary support to sustain their livelihoods and aspirations even through this difficult time. “If ever there has been urgency to make dreams come true, now is the best time because people’s dreams and hopes seem to have been put on hold, but it is our belief that dreams should not die and we are committing to working together with our customers to make it happen, because if we work together, then definitely, it can be,” he said.