The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
POLICE in Matabeleland South have noted an increase in unnecessary movement of people and more than 2 500 people have since been arrested for violating Covid-19 regulations. Speaking on behalf of the Officer Commanding Matabeleland South Province Assistant Commissioner Adolf Moyo during a provincial taskforce committee on Covid-19 meeting on Wednesday, Assistant Commissioner Ndofandaedza Jaboon said they had noted an increase in unnecessary movement of people since the relaxation of national lockdown regulations. He said 2 500 people had been arrested for violating lockdown rules in the province. “From the time the lockdown was brought into effect in March, we have arrested 2 563 for violation of Covid-19 regulations. “A total of 1 459 people were arrested for violation of movements, 371 drivers were arrested for unnecessary movement, 150 people were arrested for operating businesses when they were not supposed to while 114 people were arrested for holding church gatherings,” he said. Asst Comm Jaboon said police were not just arresting but carrying out awareness campaigns to educate people on the importance of adhering to Covid-19 regulations meant to curb the spread of the pandemic. He said they had beefed up personnel in border areas in order to fight cases of border jumping and smuggling which were rampant. Asst Comm Jaboon urged various stakeholders to alert police of border jumpers instead of harbouring them. He said border jumpers were not only a threat to families and communities but to police officers who had to pursue and arrest them without the necessary protective clothing. Asst Comm Jaboon said they were concerned about the increasing cases of returnees escaping from quarantine centres and blamed this on inadequate security. He said there was need for authorities to ensure there was adequate security at institutions used as quarantine centres. “We have a challenge as some of our quarantine centres in the province don’t have security features such as a security wall and a lockable gate,” he said. — @DubeMatutu