The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
“IT’S good to be back because without playing music in town, I would die of hunger”. These are the words of visually-impaired musician Tafi Dube, who is popular in Bulawayo for singing renditions of the late country musician Don Williams and many gospel tunes, as he revealed how life under lockdown has been. With no hand sanitiser on his rickety keyboard, the only protection he has from the novel virus is what seems like a handmade mask. Interviewed at his base, outside Pioneer House last Friday, Dube (51), said he is grateful to be back on the streets of Bulawayo. He said he had to get back to performing in the city centre with the hope to get some cash from those who enjoy his performances, because this is what he survives on. March 28 was the last day Dube was in the CBD, two days before the lockdown came into effect, marking the beginning of what he called a difficult time. Before the lockdown restrictions were eased recently, Dube was holed up at his Mabuthweni high density suburb home with his wife. He revealed that during this period, he went through spells of being on the brink of hunger as his only source for income was snatched away by the Covid-19 induced lockdown. “My friend, life under lockdown for my wife and I was hard. These past two or so months, I really suffered. Each day passed by not knowing when or what I’ll eat as I had no form of income. I only returned to town late last month,” said Dube. Well aware of the dangers that Covid-19 poses to his health, Dube who is now entertaining the few residents of Bulawayo who are cleared to be in the city centre, said the pandemic is affecting those living with disabilities the most as few of them are gainfully employed. As such, they regrettably have to rely on begging, singing for money and handouts. Fortunately, Dube said well-wishers who had his cellphone number were sending him money through EcoCash once in a while, while others sent food items to help him get by. As he was speaking about his plight, two ladies stopped to take pictures of his speaker which had a piece of paper that had his cellphone number. Likely, these are the some of the random people who send him money. Although he has resumed performing, he has another struggle, which is transport to the city centre. With Zupco being the only form of transport, Dube has to wake up very early in the morning so that he can make the trip using the buses which are always overwhelmed. Arriving in town late is disadvantageous as he has limited time to be in the city whose business now ends at 4:30PM as part of lockdown regulations. Luckily, Tafi said the police have let him be, something he is grateful for as he can go about his business with no hassles. Returning home, like getting into town, is another nightmare as Dube said he spends hours on end in a queue to board the bus and sometimes, he gets home at around 8PM. At the end of the day, all Dube wants is to be able to put food on the table so whatever challenge there is, he said he is willing to face it. But, one thing is for sure, Dube is struggling because the money he gets from his performances alone, certainly is not enough to sustain his livelihood. “The mealie meal I have won’t last me very long. I think in a few days, I won’t have any. Someone gave me rice, which is good and I’m grateful, but it leaves you extremely hungry hours after eating it,” said a visibly disheartened Dube. Follow on Twitter @bonganinkunzi