The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
RETURNEES who were quarantined at Lupane State University (LSU) campus in Lupane, Matabeleland North have all been released to go home as the university prepares to reopen on Monday. LSU was used as one of Matabeleland North’s quarantine centres and Government had directed that by Tuesday this week, all returnees should have left. Fifty three returnees who were at LSU left after testing negative upon concluding their mandatory quarantine, paving way for the reopening of the institution. The use of LSU as a quarantine centre delayed the reopening of its main campus which had been scheduled for Monday this week. Its Bulawayo campus reopened on Monday. LSU marketing and communications director Mr Zwelithini Dlamini said procedures for the smooth reopening of the university have been put in place. “All the returnees evacuated the campus on Tuesday. The fumigation process had already been arranged and started on the same day. Personnel from the Ministry of Health and Child Care carried out the fumigation exercise, soon after the returnees had left the university on Tuesday. We made sure the Students Representative Council is part of that process, mainly because this largely involves them. They witnessed the exercise and got explanation of the chemicals that were used for the fumigation process,” said Mr Dlamini. He said even after fumigating the campus, the university went on to conduct thorough cleaning as it prepares for the arrival of students on Sunday. “As students arrive on Sunday, they are going to be trained on how they are expected to conduct themselves on campus following the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic. This relates to issues of social distancing as well as to ensure that they always put on their face masks. The university will provide hand sanitisers which they will use upon entering any building on campus,” he said. Mr Dlamini said the university is almost ready for the reopening. Matabeleland North provincial social welfare officer Mr Macnon Chirinzepi said the province now has 79 people under quarantine. He said of the 79 returnees 39 of them were still accommodated at Mabhikwa High School, as the province works to finalise on alternative quarantine centres. Mr Chirinzepi dismissed claims that Government failed to provide transport for returnees as some of them are said to have walked after being discharged from quarantine centres. He said those who walked might have gotten impatient with waiting for a bus, which was later provided by Government. — @nqotshili