The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Fusion Media Group (FMG) which is hosting virtual shows every Monday, has unearthed Natalie Manzungu, an Afro-pop/house musician who on the five occasions she has performed on that platform, has wowed audiences. Using stage name Nate, the largely unknown artiste with two singles, has been serenading the online viewers with her alluring voice. Having started her musical journey at a very tender age in Harare where she was part of the Gospel Church of God choir, Nate took up music as a profession when she was 18 years old. She started off as a gospel musician under Zimbabwe’s successful gospel outfit, ZimPraise before relocating to Bulawayo where she joined the blazing Vocal Ex. “I started singing in church at a very early age and from the onset, I did this with passion, something which saw me join ZimPraise in 2013. “I moved to Bulawayo in 2015 and that is when I joined Vocal Ex in a bid to further nurture my talent by learning from others,” said Nate. Eager for a breakthrough into the industry, the 25-year-old who is sister to talented musician Kyla Blac (real name Nicole Manzungu), went solo in 2017. “From when I started singing, I wanted to create my own brand and in 2017, I decided to do my own music. I now sing Afro-pop and a bit of house, genres I ventured into because I wanted to show people my other side,” she said. Since going solo, Nate has managed to drop two singles, Set Me Free and Salute, and has been slowly adapting to the cut-throat industry. Asked why it has taken her long to come up with an album Nate said: “Well, making music isn’t easy. I needed the perfect songs and all. But, I finally have gained the confidence to release my works and I’m loving the response. “I’ll be releasing more music often from now on,” said Nate. “My first song Set Me Free which features my sister Kyla Blac was released in July last year while my second song Salute was released this year in April and is getting a fair share of radio airplay.” The lockdown has brought about a new normal in the arts sector which has seen the rise of online shows, a wave Nate is riding on. She thanked FMG for giving her a platform to showcase her talent through consistently giving her slots on their FMG Live Sessions. “I’ve performed on five of the FMG Live sessions,” she said. “These have given me an opportunity to showcase my talent and are pushing me to work on more content. “The response I’ve received from people that watch these online shows is also giving me the urge.” She said she is now working on a single titled Tora Moto which she will release next month with visuals. She teased people with the song on Monday when she performed at the FMG live session. The single features fast-growing outfit Ngoma Ingoma. — @mthabisi_mthire.