The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
HOUSE musician Bhadilah will hold an online launch for his extended play titled Mpho nga Mpho which reminds people of their culture. The four track EP has four songs namely Ndo munanga, cover single Mpho nga Mpho, M’badeleni and Replacement, produced by up-and-coming Beitbridge producer Geezo. Known for his hit song, Nkonela whose music video is given heavy rotation on Channel O, said the EP which will be available on his YouTube channel BhadilahVevo and other sites like Audiomack and SlikourOnLife. The Beitbridge-based musician said the EP fuses the Limpopo house genre which is known for its hit songs that include from South Africa such as Qinisela and Jerusalema by Master KG, Malwede by King Monada and Matorokisi by Makhadzi. “The EP will be my first work this year as the lockdown has brought me to fine touch my work. This time we have introduced the Limpopo House genre which many of the people define as Bolo (Bolobedu) house. This is to make sure that we lure an audience that we are bordered with as I eye to tap fully into the South African market,” said Bhadilah. The award-winning artiste said he chose to work on the EP alone so as to test his solo strength in such a time artistes are making innovations to stay relevant amid the pandemic. “There are no collaborations on the EP; it’s a solo ride that I have put in place to see how my brand can do on its own. The EP basically seeks to remind our society about our norms and values as Africans. The track Mpho nga Mpho reminds our community that we were gifted by God differently as a people and thus we should accept what we are and support each other in whatever hustle we pursue,” he said. Bhadilah said other tracks encompass themes of sadness, love, hate and advice. In the meantime, Bhadilah said he is mobilising resources to ensure he taps into the online shows terrain which has taken the entertainment world by storm. “I’m planning to launch the EP online and I’m in the process of reaching out to potential sponsors to help us financially to achieve this. Online shows are the future and as we go forward, I’ll continue to mobilise resources and donations from potential sponsors and tap into virtual shows to give my supporters the best they deserve during this lockdown,” said Bhadilah. The talented musician who raised the border town’s flag after managing to have the visuals for the song Nkonela air on Channel O, recently appealed for assistance to make his dream of hosting the online launch, come true. “I’m appealing for assistance from anyone who would like to see artistes from small towns overcome all odds by creating a vibrant brand for themselves,” said Bhadilah. — @mthabisi_mthire.