The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
AT a time the Government has relaxed certain Covid-19 lockdown restrictions for low-risk sports, some citizens are defying health protocols by failing to observe social distancing when exercising. The Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC) recently outlined conditions to be followed by low-risk sports codes, which are athletics, golf, cycling, triathlon, cricket, angling, polocrosse, tennis, shooting, rowing and equestrian. Gyms remain closed as part of efforts to contain the spread of Covid-19 and most people that practise healthy lifestyles and athletes flood the streets in the morning to jog in groups.
There is a growing trend of joggers wrapping up their runs by playing social soccer. In Cowdray Park, just a stone’s throw away from a police post, a group of about 30 players were yesterday seen going through football drills oblivious of the coronavirus health hazard. At Mpopoma’s Bango Ground, behind the swimming pool, another group was playing soccer as early as 7am, and when they noticed the news crew taking pictures, they became hostile and threw stones at the car. There were other fitness fanatics doing aerobics next to the swimming pool wall. Just next to Traffic West, a police station in Mpopoma, at Nyathi Youth Centre, there was another group of footballers playing a social game, while some people watched on the sidelines. Health experts have called on the public to remain cautious about their health during the fight against Covid-19 despite the relaxation of some restrictions. Zimbabwe Medical Association secretary-general Dr Sacrifice Chirisa recently said members of the public with no business in public spaces must still remain at home for the good of their health and that of the general public. He called for the correct use of masks and said people must not reuse disposable masks, while reusable masks must be washed and ironed before use. Mpilo Central Hospital Clinical Director and Acting CEO Dr Solwayo Ngwenya expressed concern at the reckless behaviour of some Bulawayo residents who conduct themselves in a manner that does not depict that the country is in a health crisis. “All I can say is that the behaviour of people in the city is worrying. It is as if all is normal. If you look at the human and vehicular traffic on our streets, you will be shocked. “You would think we are now free of Covid-19. People are still gallivanting, you find people drinking in groups and engaging in all sorts of social activities. ‘We have issued warnings but they seem to be falling on deaf ears. People think they can survive the pandemic yet some have underlying health conditions and therefore vulnerable. “Beating this Covid-19 and flattening the curve will be impossible if people continue to conduct themselves in such a manner,” Ngwenya said. The SRC has also threatened to unleash law enforcement agents on sports codes that defy set protocols and compete in unsafe environments. — @ZililoR