The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
RENOWNED boxing trainer Philip “Striker” Ndlovu, who was recently diagnosed with prostrate cancer, is in dire need of help. The 65-year-old Ndlovu’s condition has seriously deteriorated due to the cancer and what has worsened his situation is that he lives alone. Ndlovu used to start his day as early as 5am by going to Tshaka Youth Centre that houses a boxing gym to train some pugilist that work in town but now spends most of his time in bed. The coach, who trained among other boxers, former World Boxing Association Pan-African heavyweight champion Thamsanqa Dube and South Africa-based Extreme Fighting Championship (EFC) fighter and heavyweight boxer Elvis Moyo, says the pain from the prostate has become so unbearable that it has literally confined him to bed. When Chronicle Sport visited Ndlovu, the once bubbly and ever jovial trainer, was still in bed after 10am. He lives in a one room that he uses as a bedroom, kitchen and sitting room. Ndlovu no longer speaks with that commanding voice, and one can detect the pain in his faint, hoarse voice. “I’m in pain. The pain is unbearable,” says Ndlovu when asked how he’s feeling. He was diagnosed with prostate cancer in January and is appealing for at least US$3 000 to undergo an operation. World Boxing Federation (WBF) middleweight champion Charles Manyuchi donated $2 000 through EcoCash to help Ndlovu undergo a trans-urethral resection of the prostate (Turp) procedure. The last donation was $400 from another friend. Ndlovu was supposed to go for an operation on April 2 but failed to raise the required US$3 000. “The only thing I’m taking are painkillers. I haven’t been able to get any other form of treatment because I don’t have money. There were people who called when the first story was published and promised to help but they have since gone quiet. “Their calls gave me hope and I’m still hopeful that I can get help. My only worry is that my health is deteriorating fast and I’m therefore appealing to companies and fellow Zimbabweans to assist me. I want to undergo this operation so that I recover and get back to training boxers which is my passion,” said Ndlovu. He has been using a catheter since January. The trainer, a popular figure in Makokoba, is known for his passion for using boxing to get youngsters off the streets and had been holding classes at the Zimbabwe International Trade Fair (ZITF) arena-based ProActive gym before being diagnosed with cancer. Since insertion of the catheter in January, Ndlovu, who offered free boxing training sessions at Tshaka Youth Centre at Makokoba’s Stanley Square, has struggled to conduct his sessions. Speaking from his South Africa base, Moyo said he would send his brother to check on Ndlovu and help in any way possible because he played a big role in shaping his career. “It’s unfortunate that he fell ill at a time I haven’t been able to fight and assist him due to the Covid-19 lockdown. I’ll ask my brother to go and check on Striker and give him moral support,” said Moyo. Touched by Ndlovu’s plight, Football legend Zenzo Moyo, whose grandmother’s house is next to Ndlovu’s residence, bought the trainer foodstuffs that included potatoes, butternut and mealie-meal, among others. Zimbabwe Amateur Boxing Association technical director Brighton Masiyambumbi said they are planning a benefit bill for Ndlovu once the Covid-19 lockdown ends. Those interested in assisting Ndlovu can contact him on his mobile number +263776125390. — @ZililoR