The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
THE success of the Bulawayo Arts Festival (Baf) which was held online last week has inspired music and dance outfit Western Khazins to hold their debut virtual show next Tuesday. The group was part of an array of artistes that provided entertainment at the festival which was held to commemorate Bulawayo’s 126th anniversary. Through their performance and the response they got at the festival, Western Khazins realised that there was appreciation of their talent online, hence their decision to stage their own show. Next week, the group from Nkulumane which is composed of members, Archibald K Mumbamarwo known as Father K, Bruce Chirumba aka Uncle, Artwel Sibanda aka Brother K and Edington Sibanda aka Sonny K, is planning on leaving a mark on the online scene. Western Khazins leader, Father K said their participation at the Baf last week was an eye opener. “We enjoyed our performance at the Bulawayo Arts Festival and the performance inspired us to stage our own shows online as we realised we could do it. “As such, we’ll be streaming our own show on the Western Khazins Facebook page on Tuesday from Njube suburb,” said Father K. Father K said the shows will be held weekly so as to make them consistent. Known for their vintage clothing which is adored by a lot of their female fans as they run a fashion movement called the Khazin Culture, Father K said their outfits on the day will definitely light up the show. “From this show, we are eager to learn more about entertaining our fans online as it’s our wish to keep in touch with them. This is so because if we don’t do so, our careers will end up fading because of this pandemic,” he said. Having been formed in 2012, Western Khazins started out as an outfit called Four Cousinz. The group crumbled in 2015 and resurrected in September 2016 with the name Western Khazins. Their debut album titled Bhej Bhej was released last year and continues to get a fair share of airplay through songs, Good Girl and Life Yemu Ghetto (remake). For this year, the group is working on three music productions which are set to be released in the coming months. “At the moment we are working on a new Amapiano single with Cooperman and DN Shakes at Shakers Records. We also have two music collaborations with a girl called Gugue and Cal_Vin,” said Father K. – @mthabisi_mthire.