The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent BEITBRIDGE-based videographer Master G Sky of Dr Beit Film Factory has his eyes set on penetrating the regional market so as to promote his works while also giving prominence to the border town’s artistes. Only a handful of artistes have managed to make names for themselves, something Master G Sky (real name Honesty Mpofu) wants to change through producing quality videos that will change the game. Having ventured into the videography field in 2010, Master G Sky has managed to do visuals for renowned artistes such as Stunner on Ndini Ndovanakidza, South African Delayn on Babe I Know and Beitbridge artiste, Bhadilah on Nkonela whose visuals landed on Channel O. Speaking from his base in Beitbridge, Master G Sky said being confined to a small town has a lot of limitations, but he is not willing to let those limitations stop him from promoting himself as well as artistes from his town. “Being in a small town, you’re faced with lots of limitations. This makes it difficult for people to see your creativity as you’re forced, for example, to keep shooting scenes at the same places, even for different videos,” he said. Master G Sky however said, through the lockdown, he has gotten ample time to reflect on his career and come up with a way forward. Among his resolutions, he said he has decided to promote his works online and partner foreign videographers to widen his scope. “I’m working with a Zambian colleague, Taffy Turner. We’re taking advantage of the lockdown where people are glued to social media and marketing our videos online. “I’m also working on collaborating with the likes of Makhadzi from South Africa, Anisha from Jamaica and Mark2 from Zambia. Here in Zimbabwe, I am trying to reach out to Jah Prayzah, Tarry Africa, Freeman, Jah Signal, Killer T and Winky D,” he said. For artistes in Beitbridge to make a mark, Master G Sky suggested that they seek the services of videographers so that their music is accompanied by videos. “It is time for artistes who are slowly finding their feet to work with videographers also finding their feet, so that they help each other grow,” said Master G Sky. @mthabisi_mthire