The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Health Reporter
EXPERTS have warned that Covid-19-induced mental health issues like stress, anxiety and depression may lead to an increase in cases of gender-based violence and other forms of abuse. The emergence of the global pandemic has forced governments, including Zimbabwe, to impose lockdowns which have left many people unemployed and many with no means of survival as they lived off vending. In the past mental health issues have led to high suicide cases in Zimbabwe and reports show that 1 641 people took their lives last year. According to the Friendship Bench, an evidence-based mental health intervention developed in Zimbabwe to bridge the mental health treatment gap, prevalent socio-economic status will push the abuse cases. “The socio-economic status is likely to contribute especially when we look at issues of retrenchment and closure of the informal sector which was a source of living for thousands of Zimbabweans. “We are foreseeing an increase in gender-based violence cases and child abuse during these trying times where members of the public are going through stressful circumstances,” said Mr Chengetayi Nyamakupa, the programmes coordinator for the Friendship Bench. He said there is a prevalent gap in the mental health personnel work force in the country. “The fear of the unknown, job security, examinations, family relations, fear of Covid-19 an unknown wave hitting the country, safety of loved ones, documentation letters to move about, the health system not being able to deal with Covid-19 as First World country health sectors have also been overwhelmed are among the drivers of stress and anxiety in members of the public.” Mr Nyamakupa said: “There is a need for consolidated efforts by the Ministry of Health and Child Care working with both private and public sectors in order to avail mental health services.” He said the organisation has moved from the physical bench to playing a role to being online in the response to Covid-19. “We offer online counselling services based on the evidence-based problem-solving therapy technique and interested members can send us WhatsApp message on +263784846294,” he said. According to a recent Zimbabwe Republic Police report, a total of 129 suicide cases were recorded from January to March 2019 compared to 91 reported in the same period in 2018. Out of these 87 were by hanging and 42 by poisoning. Most of these suicide cases are caused by social problems which include marital or relationship and financial problems. The World Health Organisation (WHO) recently called on governments to invest in mental health as the Covid-19 has led to an increase of people in need of the service. “The impact of the pandemic on people’s mental health is already extremely concerning. Reports already indicate an increase in symptoms of depression and anxiety in a number of countries,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General of WHO. He said social isolation, fear of contagion, and loss of family members is driven by the distress caused by loss of income and often employment. “Specific population groups are at particular risk of Covid-related psychological distress. Frontline health-care workers faced with heavy workloads, life-or-death decisions, and risk of infection, are particularly affected,” he added. “Stay-at-home measures have come with a heightened risk of children witnessing or suffering violence and abuse. Children with disabilities, children in crowded settings and those who live and work on the streets are particularly vulnerable,” said Dr Ghebreyesus. He said other groups that are at particular risk are women, particularly those who are juggling home-schooling, working from home and household tasks, older persons and people with pre-existing mental health conditions. — @thamamoe