The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Health Reporter
THE Health Services Board (HSB) has said it is waiting for salary offer from Treasury after holding informal talks with striking nurses’ representatives. The nurses strike enters day nine today after nurses downed tools saying they are incapacitated to continue reporting for work. Last week, Government introduced a US$75 Covid-19 allowance for civil servants while pensioners will be getting US$30. A 50 percent salary increase was also announced for civil servants. The Secretary for the Public, Defence, Police and Prisons and Recreational Service Commissions Ambassador Jonathan Wutawunashe said the allowance does not shut the door on further negotiations between the Government and its workers. Nurses have been demanding that their salaries revert back to the October 2018 salary structure and must be quoted in United States dollars. In their letter to Government, the health workers also demanded a negotiated cost of living allowance. HSB chief executive officer Dr Paulinus Sikosana said they had informal discussions with representatives of health workers to explain the interim cushion offered by Government and emphasised the fact that negotiations are still on the table. “The majority of nurses that have gone on strike are those at Central and Provincial Hospitals. Government reviewed salaries for all Government workers by 50 percent and introduced the US$75 Covid-allowance as an interim measure. The HSB awaits guidance and a mandate with regards to a potential offer that the board can put on the negotiating table,” said Dr Sikosana Zimbabwe Nurses Association (Zina) president Mr Enock Dongo said their salaries had been eroded by inflation. He said they communicated their incapacitation on May 23 this year and among their challenges was the issue of a three-tier pricing system. “Sadly, up to now no formal communication has been received from the employer by way of writing. The socio-economic situation has continued to deteriorate with inflation now reaching 785 percent and exchange rate reaching over RTGS 90 to US$1,” he said. “The ZWL3 000 salary cannot sustainably take care of the health workers’ families under the prevailing socio-economic situation.” — @thamamoe