The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
REIGNING Miss Albinism Zimbabwe, Ayanda Candice Sibanda has commended Zimbabweans for finally accepting people with albinism as she feels they are no longer discriminating against them. The 20-year-old University of Zimbabwe first year law student said this on Saturday as she joined the rest of the world in commemorating the International Albinism Awareness Day which is marked yearly on June 13. Sibanda, a humanitarian advocate who is working tirelessly to curb stigma and discrimination of persons with albinism said: “In terms of acceptance, the world is evolving and diversifying and all the misconceptions people had are slowly being rejected. “Zimbabwe is one African country where people with albinism do not face that much discrimination and stigma which shows how much positivity we have as a nation.” She said International Albinism Awareness Day was special to her as it is an opportunity to reflect and educate people about albinism. “To me, this is a day that we get to come together as a global village to celebrate as well as educate each other on what albinism is. Despite Covid-19, we successfully held our international conferences and commemorations online,” she said. Sibanda who started modelling when she was at Dumezweni Primary School in Bulawayo took her passion to the next level when she got recognition in 2018 when she was awarded Most Promising Model at the Summer Fashion and Style awards. Last year, she was crowned Miss Albinism Zimbabwe and was second runner up in the Miss Teen Zimbabwe contest. “What drove me to be a model is my burning desire to be the best, not just for me, but for those I stand to represent. As a beauty queen, you are an ambassador and advocate, thus when you step onto the ramp, you don’t stand as one, but as many. “I think I have blended in well in the industry as I’ve adopted an attitude that if you want to work with me, I will work with you. If you don’t want, then it’s your loss,” said the model. Besides modelling, Sibanda is the founder of the Ayanda Candice Foundation. Through her foundation, she seeks to empower young women by mentoring and equipping them with leadership skills. — @mthabisi_mthire.