The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
GOVERNMENT should allow some tourism activities to open for domestic clients under set health guidelines so that the sector can be able to salvage jobs, an industry expert has said. The tourism industry is one of the heavily affected by the deadly Covid-19 with a majority of operators and hoteliers having closed indefinitely because of lack of business owing to cancellation of bookings and postponement of travel by international tourists. A majority of workers in the sector have had their contracts cancelled while some were sent home without pay. The local industry now pins its hopes on domestic tourism and a $500 million stimulus availed by Government recently is set to cushion the sector. Responding to emailed questions industry expert, Mr Ross Kennedy, who is Africa Albida Tourism chief executive said the situation in the hospitality sector remains dire. Without adequate super measures for tourism business players, he said, the future remains bleak due to a myriad of difficulties. “Survival is the only topic on the agenda right now for many in the hospitality chain in Zimbabwe. Revival of the sector is a much longer term plan and strategy that depends so much on events in neighbouring countries and long haul source markets. “Survival requires that local domestic travel and tourism be approved, authorised and endorsed by the Government and relevant ministries as soon as possible,” said Mr Kennedy. “We need to get the national parks and waterways open, get the Rainforest in Victoria Falls open, approve protocols for family/private travel by road and air, thus getting the chain working with the pent-up demand that exists right now. “This will create some cash flow for all those in the chain and thus preserve some jobs, help some operators to survive and get the new normal underway,” he said. Mr Kennedy said travel and tourism worldwide will be different when it returns to business. The novel Covid-19 had grounded the tourism value chain including airlines, car hire companies, bars and restaurants, accommodation and all activities. “Our parent ministry (tourism) together with fellow ministries, Zimbabwe Tourism Authority (ZTA), Tourism Business Council of Zimbabwe and private sector operators are engaged in active and urgent discussions on how to kick-start domestic travel and tourism,” added Mr Kennedy. The Hospitality Association of Zimbabwe, however, has said rushing to open the industry might lead to a spike in new Covid-19 cases, especially before necessary precautionary measures are put in place. ZTA, a fortnight ago, launched the Destination Zimbabwe Tourism Recovery draft plan themed: “Supporting jobs, serving national economy”, with the aim of saving jobs along the tourism value chain. The United Nations World Tourism Organisation (UNWTO) has estimated that global international arrivals for 2020 could decline by between 20-30 percent, with Zimbabwe expecting a decline of between 30-80 percent, resulting in losses of between US$0,5-US$1,1 billion in tourism receipts. — @ncubeleon