The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
THE Zimbabwe Revenue Authority (Zimra) has started adapting to the information communication technology (ICT) mode of doing business to prevent the rapid spread of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19). Zimra Commissioner General, Ms Faith Mazani, said this made this during the organisation’s annual general meeting last week where she highlighted some of the strides made by the tax body. She said the Covid-19 pandemic has transformed the world in a number of aspects including the way of doing business hence the need for a paradigm shift. “The current ‘business as usual model’ will never return and as Zimra we have started making positive strides in establishing a new normal,” said Ms Mazani. “Our new normal strategy will be anchored on; less human contact and more digital services, less brick and mortar and more virtual. “To that effect, Zimra requires more investment in ICT development and business process re-engineering. “So far we have successfully offered essential services during all phases of the lockdown period through compliance with Government directives and implementing Covid-19 mitigation structures across Zimra stations countrywide.” Ms Mazani  said presently they were implementing a number of measures to minimize human interface between their employees and clients as much as possible. She said in some cases, managers and members of staff were effectively working from home. Ms Mazani said one of their employees who tested positive for Covid-19 at the Bulawayo office had fully recovered. Zimra also announced recently that it has come up with online communication and goods clearance practices, which removes contact between officers and clients. The authority has created dedicated emails for sending/ receiving letters, documents and requests to offices for purposes of private clearances of motor vehicles, various rebates, immigrants rebate clearances/ Covid-19 essential goods rebate and preclearance facilities as well as groceries that come as consolidated. “This is in addition to the use of the internet based ASYCUDA system for clearance of commercial cargo,” said Zimra recently. Our Beitbridge Bureau understands that Zimra is regularly providing information/updates on the disease to staffers and clients and also maintaining appropriate hygiene including the disinfection of its work stations. Other measures include, the provision of appropriate Person Protection Equipment (PPEs) to its employees, the maintenance of social distance and the use of temperature guns / sanitizers at the entry gate into the border offices – to cater for border agents and other persons. -@tupeyo