The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
THE National University of Science and Technology (Nust) yesterday resumed lectures for final year students in four faculties as it implemented staggered re-opening to contain Covid-19. Students in the faculties of Applied Sciences, Engineering, Commerce, and Science and Technology Education commenced lectures yesterday. The faculties of Communication and Information Science and Built Environment are set to open at a later date. Nust’s staggered re-opening allows the university to maintain social distancing among other Covid-19 mitigation measures. Universities prematurely closed on March 24 as Government applied measures to prevent the spread of Covid-19. Government last month ordered universities to reopen in a blended manner and complete the 2019/2020 second semester before August 30. Most institutions opened last week on Monday but Nust had to postpone its opening by a week. Nust acting communications and marketing director Mr Thabani Mpofu yesterday said the university re-opened without an incident. He said students and staff temperatures were checked, hands sanitised while being informed about the new normal at the university which includes disinfecting lecture rooms. “As the students came in, we did all the necessary checks that we had outlined. We had no case where a student was found with a high temperature or any problem. We would like to thank and encourage students to continue abiding by the guidelines that have been given in terms of wearing their masks, presenting themselves to all our official point of entries and having temperatures checked, getting their hands sanitised and heading straight to their lecture rooms and leaving soon after the lectures have ended,” he said. Mr Mpofu said the university also received maximum cooperation from Zimbabwe United Passenger Company (Zupco) for its commuting students. He said the university will continue to improve its mitigation measures. Mr Mpofu said the university has taken a further step by engaging landlords providing accommodation to students so that even in their places of residence, social distancing is maintained. “I don’t think there is going to be crowding for many reasons. One of the reasons being, it’s not all the Nust students who are coming back. Remember it’s only the final year students, and not all the final year students are back. I’m sure the landlords are taking responsibility to ensure there is social distancing and no crowding because social distancing is not only for the safety of the students but the safety of the landlords and the larger community,” said Mr Mpofu. Nust students’ representative council president Innocent Dombo commended the university for taking Covid-19 precautionary measures. He said while everything seemed perfect yesterday the true picture of how the university was coping under the new conditions is likely to emerge at the end of the week when they observe how timetables are implemented by various faculties. “Everything happened according to plan. We didn’t have as many students coming to campus. Our classes were basically manageable. We were having classes of less than 50 people maintaining social distancing. As a students’ union we did our own assessment and I think the administration did their best under these Covid-19 circumstances,” he said. — @nqotshili