The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent THREE men are on the run after they allegedly beat up a man to death for refusing to buy them beer during a drinking spree in Filabusi. Matabeleland South provincial police spokesperson, Chief Inspector Philisani Ndebele said Richard Maphosa (40) of Gcabayi Resettlement in Filabusi succumbed to the injuries he sustained in the attack while admitted to United Bulawayo Hospitals on Tuesday. He said Maphosa was attacked at Empire Mine Tuckshop in Filabusi at around 9PM on May 31 by three men he had been drinking beer with. “I can confirm that we recorded a murder case which occurred in Filabusi. The now deceased Richard Maphosa was drinking with three other unidentified man at Empire Mine Tuckshop when they had a misunderstanding. They all ganged up on Maphosa and began assaulting him all over the body. One of them further struck him with an iron bar on the head while another stabbed Maphosa on the hip,” he said. “Maphosa fled from the scene and hid in a bushy area where he later lost consciousness. He was found on the following morning lying in the bush by a passerby who took him to Filabusi District Hospital. Maphosa was further referred to United Bulawayo Hospitals where his condition continued to deteriorate and he died two weeks later after succumbing to the injuries he sustained during the attack.” Chief Insp Ndebele said the suspects were not known and appealed to members of the public with information that could lead to their arrest to contact the police. He urged members of the public to desist from engaging in violence when faced with disputes. “People should desist from carrying dangerous weapons in public places as they have been the cause of many violent crimes such as murder. Some of the fights would be over petty issues that can be easily resolved but the use of these weapons worsens the whole situation,” he said. A source close to the investigations who preferred anonymity said the trio attacked Maphosa after he refused to buy them more beer during a drinking spree. He said one of the men asked him to buy more beer as they had already contributed a lot of money towards the beer they had been drinking while Maphosa had not. The source said Maphosa indicated that he did not have money which resulted in the altercation. @DubeMatutu