The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
INKULULEKO Yabatsha School of Arts (Iyasa), legendary Chase Skuza and Jah “JP” Prayzah had a good performance at the Nash TV Friday Night Live show that was watched online by more than 156 000 people. The show will be shown on ZBCtv, ZTN and Nash TV Facebook pages. Zimbabwe’s dance kings and queens, Iyasa lived up to their billing as they showed why they are one of the most sought-after groups in the country. Iyasa who got onto the stage after Fantan of Chillspot had warmed it up, introduced cultural diversity to the show that has been largely headlined by Zimdancehall acts. They started the night with Zizojikizinto by Mamelodi in a song and dance led by Lethokuhle Ncube who with the whole group gave a well-choreographed act. The group’s dance to the songs Moriva by Iphi Ntombi, Agh Shame Lovey by the late legendary African music icon Brenda Fassie and Zangalewa by Cameroon’s Golden Sounds, left the audience in awe. Led by Anele Sithole and Cheryl Mabaya in the 2018 hit song Sjaiva Sibancane, Iyasa gave the audience value for money and data with their entertaining antics on stage. The late renowned music producer and executive director Joe Maseko was honoured through his song Liyaduma before Iyasa summed up their top-drawer performance through a performance of Chase Skuza’s yesteryear hit Banolila. After Iyasa came Chase Skuza who took people back in time and losing a son less than a week ago did not stop him from doing what he knows best. The Banolila band rocked the instruments changing the dance setting every minute. Chase Skuza accompanied by two dancers confirmed his roots through the popularly isikokotsha dance. Some people said his songs like Ekhaya and Imali reminded them of the years when Zimbabwe football giants Highlanders used to win most of their games giving them value for money. Jah “JP” Prayzah and Third Generation Band were the last to come on stage. Coming to the show just after dissolving his Military Touch Movement (MTM) record label, JP who is now doing his own thing with his band, did not wear the usual military attire. “Big ups to Nash TV and Nash paints. Together we are one, stay at home, wear your masks and exercise personal hygiene. This is now the game till it comes to end. I love you all,” said JP as he left the stage. — @mthabisi_thire.