The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIMBABWE Rugby Union (ZRU) has been allocated €5 000 from a solidarity fund approved by Rugby Africa to help struggling federations during the Covid-19 pandemic lockdown. According to ZRU, the money is meant for players’ medical and foodstuffs. ZRU is also considering using part of the funds for training purposes. “We have been allocated funds which will go towards trying to alleviate the medical situation and food situation for rugby players during the lockdown. All provinces are going to get their share,” said ZRU vice-president (southern region) Martin Shone. “What will happen is that we’ll use the database we have, the register of players that was submitted by clubs. The relief comes at a time when the economy is struggling. We welcome relief from Rugby Africa. We’ll see what sort of medical and food items we can get. We will try to use some of the money for training and education, which is an important part of the game.” Shone indicated that part of the funds could go towards training referees and medics. Zimbabwe rugby has no official sponsor and players only pursue rugby for the love of the game or as a springboard to the South African or European leagues. Players have to use their personal resources to complement meagre resources by their clubs and ZRU to compete effectively. Due to lack of resources and sponsorship, the most talented Zimbabwe players are snapped up by South Africa and those with potential to break into the Springboks are given citizenship. Tendai Mtawarira is one of the most famous Zimbabwean rugby players to don the green and gold jersey after being given citizenship for his rugby prowess. The Beast, as he is popularly known in rugby circles, went on to win the Rugby World Cup with Springboks in Japan last year and thereafter called time on his illustrious international career. Another highly talented rugby player list to Zimbabwean rugby was speedy wing Tonderai Chavhanga, who also played for the Springboks before his career was cut short by a knee injury sustained nerve 2013.
Chavhanga was one of the fastest rugby players of his era. — @ZililoR.