The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Features Correspondent
ON April 1, an article headlined “Coronavirus isolation centres for pregnant women” was published in this paper following an interview with then Matabeleland North Provincial Medical Director (PMD) Dr Pugie Chimberengwa on the need to have Covid-19 isolation centres that can accommodate pregnant women only. These sentiments came after a pregnant woman was among the 10 people who were in contact with the country’s first Covid-19 positive case in Victoria Falls. “This is because the Covid-19 pregnant woman cannot be mixed with other pregnant women at a maternity ward as they might infect others,” said Dr Chimberengwa at the time. About two months later, the country had a Covid-19 positive woman giving birth while in mandatory quarantine in Gweru. She was among Zimbabwean returnees from Botswana who were housed at Gweru Polytechnic College and Mkoba Teachers’ College. The woman gave birth by caesarean section at Gweru Provincial Hosiptal, becoming the first one to do so in Zimbabwe. It became necessary to set up an isolation facility for the woman at Gweru Provincial Hospital, where she gave birth. The hospital was the closest to the quarantine centre she was housed at. It is therefore that quarantine centres specifically meant for pregnant women are set up as they require specialised care. Theatres meant specifically for quarantined pregnant women requiring Caesarean sections also have to be set up. Leading up to her delivery, 20 health professionals, thoroughly prepared for the procedure at Gweru Provincial Hospital. The hospital’s consultant obstetrician and gynaecologist Dr Johannes Mukwembi, who was the midwifery team leader, said they had to improvise and create a room for the delivery. In order to ensure all was on-point, the midwifery team geared up for the challenge almost a week before the delivery. They even ran a practice delivery session a day before the woman delivered to ensure that everyone was prepared and no complications would result. “We had intensive round the clock pre-op preparations for almost six days and these included setting up an identified safe facility for her from scratch at the hospital. “We ran a drill on May 27 which was on a Wednesday to assess the setup and it worked well,” said Dr Mukwembi. When the day came, the team set up in the morning, five hours before the delivery. Members of the team were anxious as they were about to make history in the country. “On the day, we got there at 7AM and prepared for her operation as a team. The baby was delivered at 12 midday,” said Dr Mukwembi. He said the wonder kid was also tested for the deadly virus and came out negative. “We nursed our patient for three days post-operation as per protocol under strict infection prevention conditions. “We tested the baby at birth just to rule out the theoretical risk of in-utero transmission and the baby was negative. The baby will have a repeat test on day eight, and weekly as well till the mother recovers,” said Dr Mukwembi. Dr Mukwembi who is a lecturer at the Midlands State University (MSU) Faculty of Medicine said there is need for women who give birth during the Covid-19 pandemic to exercise extreme caution and good personal hygiene practices. “The baby should be nursed the usual way as per WHO guidelines. The mother needs to put on a mask and sanitise her hands every time she is in contact with the baby either for breastfeeding or for diaper changes,” said Dr Mukwembi. Gweru Provincial Hospital medical superintendent Dr Fabian Mashingaidze said quarantine centres for pregnant women are of paramount importance as seen with how the first case was accommodated. “Now that we know such issues can arise, it is prudent that our health facilities be prepared to handle such cases if they do come up. “There’s a need to put in place provision for these services even to Covid-19 infected patients,” said Dr Mashingaidze. Ministry of Health and Child Care Acting Director Family Health Dr Davidzoyashe Makosa said they have learnt a lot from the development. “The valuable lessons learnt from Gweru Provincial Hospital will be used to improve our model of response for managing similar scenarios,” said Dr Makosa urging health workers to be fully prepared to attend to such cases in order to continue saving lives. “It is essential that our health facilities make provisions to ensure that they continue to offer quality maternity services. “This include normal and caesarean section delivery services at the appropriate level of care for eligible women, including Covid-19 positive clients,” said Dr Makosa. Dr Makosa added that the Ministry continues to adapt to the health approach changes brought about by the pandemic. “The Ministry’s provincial and institutional leadership have been making those preparations and continue to do so in order to ensure quality safe maternity services for mothers and their babies, while maintaining safety for the health workers. “Our partners and stakeholders are also supporting these preparations in various ways,” said Dr Makosa. With behaviour change inevitable in light of the deadly virus, the need for special quarantine centres for pregnant women should be prioritised countrywide. — @mthabisi_mthire.