The Chronicle Andile Tshuma, Chronicle correspondent
Bulawayo’s Thorngrove infectious diseases hospital’s closed wards are expected to re-open next week after undergoing a $74,7 million facelift. The project is on course with significant refurbishment work having already been completed. The hospital was renovated with the support of central Government and other partners following realisation that the health facility was not ready for Covid-19 patients. At the completion of the renovations, the infectious disease hospital is expected to start handling critically ill Covid-19 patients. The hospital was initially supposed to close for two weeks but the period had to be extended after realising that more work needed to be done. Bulawayo city council Senior Public Relations Officer Mrs Nesisa Mpofu yesterday said work that includes ward partitioning, ward extensions and other constructions had been completed. “The rehabilitation of the hospital started on 22 April 2020 and is expected to be completed on 30 June at a cost of about $74million,” she said. Mrs Mpofu said work involved partitioning of three cubicles in the male ward, extension of main isolation ward for Covid-19 by creation of disinfection rooms, change rooms, dish wash rooms, linen rooms and labour ward She said work on the Ambulance wash bay and construction of disinfection septic tank had also been completed. The other work done includes the construction of a wheel and foot bath at the main entrance gate, the extension of a drug store and all internal service roads within the facility which have been resurfaced. Work on the new entrance and gate have been completed as as well as a walkway leading to staff rest rooms. The children’s isolation ward has been re-painted while broken window panes and gutters have been replaced. Two boreholes have been drilled and one has already been fitted with a Jojo Tank. Refurbishment of ablution facilities for children’s wards has also been completed. Mrs Mpofu said what is outstanding are electrifical fittings to light internal roads and walkways to rest rooms, laundry extension, work on the kitchen, administrative offices and refurbishment of four staff cottages. She said the mortuary extension and equipping is also yet to be done as well as the refurbishment of the TB ward and ablution facilities. Two 10 000 litre Jojo tanks are yet to be installed while a dustbin area is also to be built. Ventilators and gas tanks are yet to be installed at the isolation ward as well as the flooring, ceiling and wall tiling. — @andile_tshuma