The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
GOD is good! Believers and churchgoers in the country have broken the 86 days jinx of being in the wilderness after the ban of gatherings which was declared on March 17 was lifted for churches on Thursday afternoon by President Mnangagwa. Churches are now allowed to congregate only if they are 50 or less and exercise personal hygiene coupled with wearing face masks. As the church buildings were slowly turning into white elephants, a new social church life has awoken as churches have improvised on how they will carry out God’s work in light of the strict social distancing and Covid-19 preventive measures. Due to the ongoing lockdown, churches had turned to online sermons, but with the current economic situation, a few were able to worship from the comfort of their homes due to data constraints. Johane Masowe WeChishanu congregants from Selbourne Park yesterday relinquished the lost time as they met joyfully to praise the Lord in one space. The apostolic sect leader, Madzibaba Mutumwa said as a church, they have manufactured masks and secured sanitisers to ensure they mitigate the spread of the deadly virus. Apostle leaders are known for laying hands on the heads of congregants as they pray for them, but Madzibaba Mutumwa said that will no longer be the case. “We are grateful for the move by the President to allow churches to reopen. As the apostolic sector, to make sure that we comply with the regulations, we will do away with our previous way of congregating. “In terms of praying, we will not be laying hands on the heads of those who are being prayed for and as a leader who was getting congregants from as far as Botswana, South Africa and Mutare, that will not be the case as we will not receive any intercity congregants or people from outside the country,” said Madzibaba Mutumwa. Even though situated at an open space area, the congregants had their hands sanitised upon getting to the church’s compound. As President Mnangagwa declared Monday, June 15 as the National Day of Prayer and Fasting where he is set to lead by hosting a church service at State House in Harare, Madzibaba Mutumwa said they will follow suit. Pastor Bruce Edwards of Kingdom Empowerment Centre which is situated in the central business district (CBD) said they are working on measures to ensure they resume church services tomorrow in batches. “We appreciate our President, Government and leadership and are more than blessed to have a Government that fears the Lord. The church is ready to go back and we’ll continue to abide by the requirements of the policies by the government to ensure safety of the saints and that of the citizens,” said Pastor Edwards. Prophet Simbarashe Emmanuel of Shalom Believers Fellowship situated in Magwegwe North said they are not yet ready to resume services and will only open doors next week. “We are in the process of buying sanitisers and any other needed material in the fight against Covid-19. Thus we expect to start our services next Sunday,” said Prophet Israel. Prophet Tatenda Makasi of Destiny Life Ministries which is found in the city and in Gwanda said: “New things will be incorporated within the church and we are working on engaging health personnel to come and teach people more about Covid-19 at our churches. “We will hold our sermons almost daily so as to ensure all our congregants attend.” For Nomcebo Moyo who fellowships at Victory Fellowship, the opening of churches is a chance to unwind and get away from home as she has been holed up for three months. “I cannot wait to go to church on Sunday as that will take my mind off from being at home as I’ve been there since the lockdown started,” she said. Joseph Tshuma who worships at Roman Catholic Church in Pumula South however, said he feels the opening of churches is too soon as it may fuel the spread of Covid-19. — @mthabisi_mthire.