The Chronicle Andile Tshuma
Somewhere in the shadow of the Covid-19 pandemic is another pandemic, gender-based violence (GBV). The United Nations has labelled it the “shadow pandemic”. There has been a global rise of GBV cases associated with home confinement, as the Covid-19 pandemic has seen many people being locked down with abusers. There is talk about how Covid-19 is leaving more people exposed and vulnerable to abuse. Statistics are still sketchy about actual figures of victims, but there is just not enough action that corresponds with the severity of the matter. Despite the many hardships being faced and the new complexities of life that have been exacerbated by the coronavirus, freedom from violence cannot under any circumstances be surrendered as the right to live a life free from abuse and violence is a basic and fundamental human right. The most vulnerable members of society are experiencing untold suffering at the hands of their household members during this time. Children, women, men, people with disabilities, the elderly and other demographic groups are suffering during this time when people are supposed to be spending more time at their own homes than with other people. Globally, many countries are reporting a surge in cases of domestic violence and multiple forms of GBV, as well as violence against children. Strategies to address these challenges are being implemented in our neighbouring countries such as introductions of special toll free numbers for GBV victims only, with dedicated personnel aimed at responding to cases to do with GBV. Zimbabwe could emulate some of the strategies being implemented by its neighbours to ensure that it is easier to reach out to victims sooner, and saves lives. To bring an end to this shadow pandemic, Zimbabwe must act now. There is relief that Zimbabwe is under level two of the lockdown. However, while a lot of stringent measures and regulations have been eased, the lockdown is still on and hours spent with abusers are still long. Support systems for people experiencing GBV remain few and information on how they can get help during this time remains limited. There is a lot of information on Covid-19 and what to do when one suspects an infection, and information on hygiene and etiquette at this time, but information on help for GBV victims and survivors remains limited. Following the spike in GBV and domestic violence cases countrywide, police in Bulawayo have condemned the crimes and called for calm and harmony in households during the indefinite lockdown meant to avert the spread of Covid-19. This followed the gruesome murder of a 52-year-old man, allegedly by his 44 year old wife in Emganwini suburb sometime in April, following a dispute over television channels. In Zimbabwe, about one in three women aged 15 to 49 have experienced physical violence and about one in four women have experienced sexual violence since the age of 15. Awareness alone cannot create change, it is actions that create change and it is the duty of every member of society to bring about this change. The advocacy and support for the elimination of gender-based violence should be a 365-day task and not just because it is trending online due to Covid-19. Women and men have been suffering in silence in thorny homes and it has taken this pandemic to show that we already had an even deadlier pandemic. Creating safe spaces for all and fighting in unity to end these violations should be on everyone’s diary every day. It should not be an event but a culture. In an effort to champion gender equality and advocate for the elimination of GBV in our communities, Government must prioritise and implement the various recommendations made to reduce and eliminate femicide in all of its forms. There should be a clear commitment to fostering better working relationships between Government, private and civil society actors towards maximising collective impact in eradicating the root causes of GBV. Government must also work to address the causes of GBV in communities. Some of the contributing factors on this pandemic include poverty, general financial hardship, job loss, loss of income especially now as a result of the pandemic, leading to frustration, restriction of movement, confinement at home, uncertainty and fear. Government must work to deliver jobs to people and improve on social safety nets for vulnerable communities so that no Zimbabwean experiences GBV rooted in poverty and financial frustration. All Zimbabweans must reflect on their own complicity in maintaining the culture of violence and abuse, make the necessary behavioural and attitudinal shifts and commit to standing together to safeguard communities against these vicious cycles of abuse. Advancing gender equality and dismantling patriarchy in Zimbabwe must therefore go beyond awareness to include radically transforming those systems and institutions that produce and reproduce unequal power relations. The law must continue to protect women and men from abuse and must uphold equal treatment of victims of GBV. In most countries including Zimbabwe, navigating the justice system is complex and tedious hence many victims of GBV end up withdrawing their cases before they reach court. Now with Covid-19, these complexities may be increased as even mobility is limited. A few cases result in conviction. In most cases, abused people tend to withdraw cases due to lack of knowledge of their rights and in some cases the perpetrators are the families’ breadwinners. Women, and men too, must have support systems within the justice system that help them garner the courage to report all forms of violence and seek justice. The shadow pandemic is real and it affects our sisters and brothers, our parents, friends, neighbours. It is noble to constantly check on each other because you never know which phone call or text could save a life. As we are practising social distancing, let it not be just physical distancing and let us instead use the available communication platforms to check on each other and to stay safe. Remember to report GBV perpetrators.