The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
KANINDO musician Obadiah Matulana who is stuck in South Africa due to the closure of borders as a result of Covid-19 travel restrictions, has taken advantage of that occurrence and is using his time there to collaborate with rhumba group, Mlambos Express. Together with the SA-based group from Matabeleland South, they are working on a track titled Lockdown which will be released at the end of this month. Matulana left Zimbabwe for South Africa just before the lockdowns in both countries began to pursue shows across the Limpopo. However, just like thousands of Zimbabweans, he has been stuck there for the past three months. He has decided not to sit on his laurels and instead, pursue his career there. Matulana expressed joy in collaborating with Mlambos Express saying it was exciting working with the group. “I’ve waited for long to do a project with the Super Legends, Mlambos Express Band. We saw this as an opportunity to communicate a message to the Rhumba fans who might have lost hope due to the current hopeless situation caused by Covid-19,” said Matulana. The forthcoming track, according to Matulana, will bring hope to people, not only to those who have been affected by the pandemic, but even those who miss the dancefloor. “This single is not only a message of hope to those affected by the pandemic, but it’s also a catalyst to those that can move the foot. The song is saying even in lockdown, we still have hope so let’s enjoy together in good and bad times.” Commenting on the track, Mlambos Express leader, Fiselani “SaMangwe” Ngwenya said: “People have a lot of questions about the lockdown, but no answers. We want to give them hope with the talking guitars while also giving those with willing feet, something to do while on lockdown.” He said once released, the track will be available on digital stores. “This mouth-watering track will be available on digital stores like iTunes, Google Play, Amazon, Spotify and Simfy Africa. It’ll also be available on CD and USB. “God willing, the song will be accompanied by a video,” said SaMangwe from his Johannesburg base. Mlambos Express was founded in the early 1990s by a highly talented young man from the little-known village of Luvula. After making waves in their area, they relocated to South Africa in the late 90s. Their debut album, Imfundo Yimpilo released in 2002 was an instant hit and since then, they have never looked back.