The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Rap king Asaph and hip hop sensation TiGonzi are in the race to clinch Glam Awards as they have been pitted together in three categories. The awards which are meant to honour youths who are making waves in the arts sector are set to be held online on July 11. Now in their fourth edition, the awards will see Asaph and TiGonzi battle it out in the Outstanding Male Artiste, Outstanding Performance/Live Act and Outstanding Lyricist categories. TiGonzi who wrapped up last year in style by walking away with three gongs at the Zimbabwe Hip Hop Music Awards is leading the Glam Awards nominees pack with six nominations. He is closely followed by Asaph who has four. Rapper King98 has three nominations while Ishan, Tammy Moyo, up-and-coming artiste Diego Tryno, Hilzy and Amapiano queen Shasha are tied with two nominations. The Matabeleland region is also represented by Mzoe 7 who is nominated in the Outstanding Performance/Live Act. Also part of the nominees are actors Everson Chiedza and Dillion Mafukidze who became overnight darlings through their roles on the crackerjack drama series Wadiwa Wepa Moyo. Founder of the awards Albert Takudzwa Chigiya who caused controversy through his unpopular role as Tendai on Wadiwa Wepa Moyo said the awards were now taking place online due to the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic that has forced the country to go on lockdown. “The 4th edition of the awards which was supposed to be held before the Covid-19 outbreak will now be hosted online, on a platform which will allow viewers to watch multiple performances from the comfort of their homes,” Chigiya said. He said he is in talks with various partners to ensure the show is a success. The awards, if held successfully online, will become the first in the country to be held in the virtual space, a sign of the change that has been made in the entertainment field due to the pandemic. Other nominees are Queen Vee, Bazooker, Enzo Ishall, Ndunge Yut, Boss Pumacol, Nutty O, Noxy Divine Diva, MisRed, Munashe Chirisa, Ray Vines and Ben Chest among many others. – @mthabisi_mthire.