The Chronicle SKY Blues legend Peter Ndlovu features in an engaging new book delving into the unexpected twists and turns during the trailblazing careers of Britain’s first African footballers. The Zimbabwean winger, who played for Coventry City between 1992 and 1997, was the first player from the continent to feature in the new Premier League, paving the way for other great names to follow. Springing off the bench to make his debut in Coventry’s 2-0 win over Tottenham Spurs at White Hart Lane, the “instant hero” would go on to score 39 goals during 176 top-flight appearances. Author Ed Aarons has unearthed some of the bizarre circumstances behind the flying winger’s time at Highfield Road, including  a drinking bet among a group of friends in Zimbabwe that helped the ‘Bulawayo Bullet’ improve his fortunes at the club. Speaking to Aarons, Winston Makamure (Ndlovu’s former agent) recalled how the wager that he could have a picture taken with Ndlovu, who they regarded as one of the best footballing talents in England, changed his life forever. Winston, who was attending university in Hertfordshire, slept rough in a hire car at a service station after turning up at Coventry City’s training ground only to be told by a laundry lady that the team would not be going through its paces that day. Undeterred, he returned to land the picture with the gracious star, nicknamed ‘Nuddy’ by fans, and his team-mates after saying he was from the same village as the winger, even though they spoke different African languages. Forced to switch to English, Ndlovu told teammates they didn’t want to be rude before bringing his devoted fan some sandwiches. Inexplicably, Ndlovu then told manager Bobby Gould that Makamure was his agent, before giving him tickets for a game against Ipswich at Highfield Road that weekend. The fans’ favourite was voted man of the match, with Makamure watching from the stands after giving his seat in the directors’ box to his cab driver because he wasn’t wearing a suit and tie. However, he ended up taking on the job, negotiating an improved contract with the Sky Blues and continuing in the role until his countryman retired in 2011.