The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent FORMER radio personality and business woman, Emma Nxumalo on Sunday morning celebrated her birthday by donating food and clothing to Queen Elizabeth Children’s home and Jabulani Flats in Bulawayo as part of her #MyBabyToo initiative. #MyBabyToo is a cause founded last year by Nxumalo after she realised there was something that she could do for less privileged children in the city. This year the intervention comes at a time that the less privileged especially children are wallowing in poverty and hunger because of the Covid-19 induced lockdown. Some people who lived off vending were not able to do so. It was at Jabula Flats where how dire the situation of many people have come to face during the Covid-19 lockdown. Emma who was part of last year’s Roil Bulawayo Arts Awards (RoilBAA) fashion police said she was heartbroken to hear that food for some had become a luxury. “I was heartbroken when one of the grannies cried because she had said some of the food items were now like luxury. We as a community should try as much as we can to help our fellow brothers and sisters.” Nxumalo gave 12 families with vulnerable children at Jabula Flats food stuffs and clothes. Part of the donated stuffs such as bread, sugar beans, chunks, cabbages, and toothpaste. She said the Covid-19 pandemic has exacerbated their plight. “The Covid-19 pandemic has made the lives of the less privileged children hard because most of them are supported by their grannies who used to sell tomatoes in the streets and now, they are locked down and have lost their source of income,” said Nxumalo. The Jabula Flats residents’ chairperson Pamela Mackay thanked Nxumalo for the timely donation as such interventions always pass them by. “We are grateful with what she has done for us. The people are really going through a difficult time like other wards in the city. However, some people get some help but for us in Ward 1, we are skipped. The only donation we get is from Fees the City and also Bulawayo City Council usually donate to the elderly if they have something,” said Mackay. She said because of hunger some children have started resorting to stealing. “We got some other children who are less privileged and don’t go to school. We have an issue where one child has resorted to stealing because he doesn’t go to school and it’s very bad. “However, we say happy birthday to Emma and thank you so much,” said Mackay.