The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Award-winning singer Nomathamsanqa “Nkwali” Mkhwananzi says the lockdown has given her a chance to be at home and bond with her son and mother, something she has been longing for. The musician who was part of the performers at the inaugural Bulawayo Arts Festival returned home from her Europe base in February for some downtime. She also hoped to use her time home to record music videos for her upcoming second album. But when the ban on public gatherings came into effect a month after her return, those plans were put on hold. She only managed to record one video for Nyawo Lwami prior to the ban. Reflecting on her time under lockdown, Nkwali said being at home was a priceless moment in her life. “I’ve been spending time with my son at home. It’s bad that I can’t go and work, but I’m grateful that the lockdown has given me an opportunity to spend quality time with my son. “Usually, I don’t spend that much time here (Zimbabwe) so this really has been a great opportunity to bond with him and my mother since she has also been alone ever since my father passed on two years ago,” said Nkwali. Also, being home, Nkwali said has exposed her more to local audiences after she got slots to perform at the national Culture Week celebrations and Bulawayo Arts Festival. “Being home also gave me the chance to perform at Culture Week celebrations in Harare. I enjoyed it a lot as I usually watch these shows when I’m in Europe. “Even at the Bulawayo Arts Festival, I had a good time as I was part of the celebrations of the city’s 126th anniversary. It’s always a great feeling to perform at home as I get to show people how I represent them when I’m overseas,” said Nkwali. Besides bonding with family, Nkwali said she is also using her contacts to source food for distribution to vulnerable families in Bulawayo who have been affected by the Covid-19 pandemic. Like most artistes world over, Nkwali said the pandemic has affected her greatly as shows she was billed to perform at abroad, have been postponed to next year.