The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
UNITED States of America-based former Warriors and Highlanders captain Thulani Ncube has launched a clothing line, Biya 4, named after his nickname and the jersey number he donned in Bosso and national team colours. Ncube is working on the Biya 4 project with an unnamed friend, who is helping the former footie star with designs. In an interview from his base in Plainfield, Indiana yesterday, the Gwabalanda-bred Bosso legend was hopeful his clothing line will be a success, as it is influenced by people that have supported him from his playing days. Ncube took to social media to announce the arrival of his Biya 4 clothing line, posting a picture written “B4C…Biya 4 Clothing”. The label will include T-shirts, caps and shorts. His followers applauded him for the move he has taken, promising to support his venture, while some, mostly based in South Africa, inquired about where and when they can purchase the Biya 4 products.
Ncube responded: “Working on it”. Presently, Biya 4 products are only available in the United States. He has been using the Covid-19 lockdown to fine-tune Biya 4 designs and now the ex-national team defender, who is a developmental coach in the United States, feels he is ready to introduce the products to the world. “I started working on Biya 4 before Covid-19, but the lockdown presented more time to fine-tune some of the designs and modalities. I’m working on launching the line. My hope is that one day the Biya 4 clothing line will go beyond being just a brand popular for T-shirts, caps and shorts, but it will be a line that will provide everything related to clothing. Sweaters, pants and other products will be available in due course. My friend and I have already made the designs,” said Ncube. “Right now we are also working on setting up an online shop and with time we will have our products at some stores. It is our hope that the Biya 4 products will be available in Africa before the end of the year,” he said. By launching the Biya 4 clothing line, Ncube could be following in the footsteps of other popular sports personalities that have launched successful clothing labels. The power of the celebrity fashion line is undeniable and over the years celebrities have leveraged their star power to launch their own brands. Football superstar Cristiano Ronaldo has the CR7 brand, which has a line of shirts and underwear range. The Portugal captain has been the face of the World Cup marketing campaigns for brands such as Nike, Samsung and Emirates. Former Manchester United and England star David Beckham rolled out his own underwear range in partnership with retailer H&M in 2012. — @ZililoR