The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
COLLEGE Central, producers of the much-loved Wadiwa Wepa Moyo drama series are hard at work on a comedy movie which they hope will resonate with most locals. The movie which is titled Organized Crime features a star-studded cast that includes legend Stephen Chigorimbo known for the role John Huni in Studio 263, lead actress Melinda Shumba who rose to fame through her role as Saru in Special Class, Chati Butao who played Godobori in Gringo Troublemaker, Monalisa Tendere and Dillion Mafukidze who played Sis Shami and Biko respectively in Wadiwa Wepa Moyo and comedians Doc Vikela and Gonyeti. Shot in Harare, Organized Crime is set to hit the small screens by November. One of the production’s screenwriters, Jani said the movie is meant to warm people’s hearts through its thrills. “The production name was driven by the genre of the movie as it was made to sound like a thriller, but in actual fact, it’s not. It’s a fun filled comedy of a street pickpocket Teddie who has to pay back the money he stole from a local tycoon or else his child will be in danger. “Teddie decides to team up with his partner in crime Tin Tin to rob a house and they hire a fugitive. His plan goes wrong when they find a maid inside the house,” said Jani. He said the movie that was shot in three weeks will be an hour long. “We are now 75 percent done with the post-production and this offering will certainly help people laugh off their miseries. As a brand, we hope to entertain the people and also solidify our position in the film industry because we are here to change the game,” he said. Those working behind the scenes of the movie are Chigorimbo as producer, screenwriter Derby Bheta who is doubling up as one of the directors. Other screenwriters are Ian Msakanda and Jani with Msakanda as the director of photography. Vitalis Charamba and Brighton Ndhlovu are responsible for sound design while Tendere is the production manager with Roderick Kuseri being the BTS. College Central which was formed in 2017 has produced dramas and films that include Wadiwa Wepa Moyo, Things we do for love and Special Class. Their defining moment however was the production of Wadiwa Wepa Moyo, a drama that was a hit among many Zimbabweans earlier this year because of its simple, but relatable storyline. — @mthabisi_mthire.