The Chronicle Andile Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
FOUR more people have escaped from quarantine centres around the country, bringing the total number of quarantine escapees to 187. One person is reported to have escaped from the NSSA Hotel quarantine centre in Beitbridge Matabeleland South Province while three others absconded from Murewa Training Centre quarantine centre in Mashonaland East Province. This comes after two other Malawian nationals who tested positive for Covid-19 during profiling and screening at Beitbridge escaped last week, following the escape of two other people of Malawian origin in May at the same facility. The Covid-19 status and identities of the latest escapees however, has not been disclosed. The number of arrested escapees remains at 28 as police continue to search for [people absconding from quarantine centres putting communities at risk of covid-19 infection. National police spokesperson Assistant Commissioner Paul Nyathi confirmed the development. “One person escaped from NSSA Hotel, Beitbridge while three others from Murewa Training Centre quarantine centres. The cumulative number of escapees is now 187 while those arrested remain at 28,” he said. “Nine people were arrested for border jumping at Nyamapanda while one person was arrested for smuggling at Beitbridge,” said Assistant Commissioner Nyathi. He called for members of the public to be wary of the increasing number of ovid-19 infections and to abide by Covid-19 regulations, with more than 78 000 people having been arrested for violating Covid-19 regulations to date across the country. “The number of new Covid-19ases being detected is on the increase, we urge members of the public to conscientiously adhere to the measures put in place by Government to minimise the effects of this scourge,” said Assistant Commissioner Nyathi. Police have said following the escapes, they put tight security at the isolation centres and on the boundary of the main quarantine centre and are being assisted by the Zimbabwe National Army, the Support Unit and the Duty Uniform Branch (DUB). The Ministry of Health and Child Care has red flagged quarantine escapees, especially those that have tested positive for the virus, as they risk transmitting the virus in communities. There have been calls for authorities to name and shame quarantine escapees for communities to be able to identify them, as they pose a danger due to their Covid-219 known and unknown statuses. According to the Public Health Act, an individual loses their rights if they are deliberately posing a danger to the rest of society, as in the case of Covid-19 patients escaping from a quarantine centre and going into the community.
@andile_tshuma