The Chronicle THE long-term future of three more Bidvest Wits players is up in the air, with their agent critical of how the new owners have gone about their business. Mike Makaab has expressed frustration at how the change of ownership was initially handled, as players and staff were only informed of the news last week. Speculation of the pending purchase had been reported in the media since April, and Makaab expects to hold talks soon with the new owners about Brighton Mhlongo, Lorenzo Gordinho and Terrence Dzvukamanja. Gordinho joined Wits six months ago from Kaizer Chiefs. “I am a little disappointed that the players weren’t consulted prior to the sale, but we have what we have now. We need to be mature about it and we are going to have to discuss it with each player individually and see what their feeling is; that’s the mature way to handle things,” Makaab said. “It’s no good throwing your toys out of the coat and getting upset, ranting and raving. We have to look at this sensibly now to find a solution that is viable and acceptable to all parties.” Sello Chokoe, who is expected to retain his role as CEO when the club is renamed Tshakhuma Tsha Madzivhandila and relocates to Venda, told local media that Wits’ big earners and coach Gavin Hunt would have to find new jobs. TTM would not be able to afford them, Chokoe said. “You can’t make statements like that. The owners should have thought about that before they bought the club,” said Makaab. “I cannot make any movements really until such a time that the sale has been approved by the PSL. In football, you’ve never seen it all. We will do what is right for our clients; we must sit down with the parties that purchased Bidvest Wits and see where they are coming from. There is no truth that Mamelodi Sundowns have approached me for Terrence. No club has officially approached me for his services. And the truth is that at this point he is contracted to Bidvest Wits and he has to honour that contract, until there’s a time to dispute that contract. Brighton, Lorenzo and Terrence know that.” – Soccer Laduma