The Chronicle Court Reporters
THE Judicial Service Commission (JSC) yesterday marked 10 years of existence following the complete separation of the administration of affairs of the judiciary from the Ministry of Justice, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. As part of its 10th anniversary celebrations, JSC had an open day to allow members of the public access to judicial services in line with its thrust of ensuring that the underprivileged have access to the justice system. The celebration is running under the theme: “Transparency and Accountability to enhance access to justice and the rule of law.” Members of the public were allowed to visit the courts across the country and engage with staff members. At the Bulawayo High Court and Tredgold Building where the Labour Court and magistrates’ courts are housed, members of the public were given brochures containing vital legal information in various languages. Court officials explained to people how the courts operated. JSC’s strategic plan (2016-2020) includes the promotion of greater access to justice with particular focus on the underprivileged and vulnerable in society as one of its main goals and opens days fulfil that objective
JSC spokesperson Ms Rumbidzai Takawira said: “It necessarily means that the judiciary must open itself to allow Zimbabweans to appreciate how the courts function. Therefore, the Commission took the unconventional route to reserve a day on which members of the public will be allowed access to the courts, not for purposes of litigating, but to understand the functions of each court in terms of the law.” Ms Takawira said open days for the judiciary are a hallmark of democratic institutions and an international best practice with many jurisdictions using them as a tool to cultivate relations between themselves and the public, to measure the effectiveness of their operations as well as to get important feedback from the public and stakeholders. She said the initiative focuses on increasing the visibility of courts in the communities in which they are located. Ms Takawira said every citizen must have basic knowledge of the operations of the courts. She said the exercise is intended to ensure that the courts are transparent and accountable to the public. The provincial magistrate in charge of Bulawayo metropolitan province Mr Enias Magate said open days were important as they helped the generality of the public to access their services as well as demystify the courts. He said the response from the public was overwhelming as hundreds of people temporarily diverted from their busy schedules and thronged Bulawayo courts to inquire on the services offered. “We urge members of the public to report corruption and as JSC, we don’t condone corruption and we have zero tolerance to corruption,” said Mr Magate. JSC also honoured 14 long serving workers in Bulawayo who have been at the organisation for a period between 30 and 38 years. They were awarded certificates for long service. Those who were awarded long service certificates include Ms Thokozile Ncube, an executive assistant at Tredgold Building, Ms Edinah Khupe, a senior transcriber, Ms Sandisiwe Moyo, an accounting assistant at the Master’s Office, Mr Leonard Zhou, an office orderly at the Master’s Office and Ms Immaculate Ncube who is an executive assistant. Others are Ms Pamhidzai Banda, a senior court interpreter at Western Commonage Court, Ms Joice Ngoma, an assistant registrar at the Bulawayo High Court, Ms Marble Ndlovu, an executive assistant at the Bulawayo High Court, Mr Gibbins Nyamakope, Herbert Magumise, Ms Sibongile Sibanda, and MacDonald Mpofu who are all clerks of court at Tredgold Building. Mr Edwin Nyahwa who is an assistant registrar at the Master’s Office and Ms Bekezela Gumede, a records and information assistant at Master’s Office also received the long service awards. The ceremony was held at the Bulawayo High Court and senior judge in charge of Bulawayo, Justice Martin Makonese and Mr Magate presented the certificates. In Matabeleland South, members of the public turned up in numbers at Kezi, Filabusi, Beitbridge, Plumtree, Esigodini and Gwanda magistrate’s courts. Court officials in Gwanda moved around the town inviting people to visit the court. Provincial magistrate in charge of Matabeleland South, Ms Charity Maphosa said members of the public had expressed satisfaction over the services they were providing. She said as early as 8AM people had started trickling in to enquire about court services. “We didn’t receive any complainants from members of the public as they were commending our efforts in enforcing the justice system and disposal of various cases,” said Ms Maphosa. Mr Isaiah Ngwenya from Ntepe area who visited the Gwanda magistrate’s court commended JSC’s open door policy, saying his visit was an eye opener on how the courts operate. In Matabeleland North, scores thronged the various courthouses in the province. Matabeleland North administrative province is made up of Binga, Hwange, Lupane and Victoria Falls magistrates’ courts while Inyathi, Nkayi and Tsholotsho are handled by Bulawayo province. The main provincial event was held at the Hwange magistrates’ courts. The provincial magistrate-in-charge of Matabeleland North Mrs Sekai Chiwundura presented long service certificates and food hampers to Mr Philip Ndarevani, an accounting assistant stationed in Lupane and Mr Tellman Sithole, a groundsman stationed in Binga for serving in the JSC for 32 and 30 years respectively. In Victoria Falls, a Chronicle news crew witnessed clients being sanitised and encouraged to observe social distancing as resident magistrate Ms Lindiwe Maphosa and JSC staff including officers from Sherriff office at a help desk attended to them. Ms Maphosa said a majority of clients inquired mostly about civil cases while others wanted to know about different types of courts found in the country. In the Midlands province, JSC launched its open day by offering free legal advice to members of the public and awarding long services awards to members at the Gweru magistrate’s court. Gweru regional magistrate Mrs Phathekile Msipa led the commemorations with thousands of local residents flocking the court building where they received free legal advice among other judicial services. Gweru Provincial Magistrate in charge of Midlands, Mr Tavengwa Sangster said the occasion provided an opportunity for the public to answer questions about the operations of the various courts and departments. “As we allow ordinary citizens to approach the courts and have the functions explained to them in simple terms on this open day, we also award our members of the JSC who have been loyal and served for a period of 30 to 42 years,” he said. Mr Sangster also presented three magistrates with long serving awards. Mr Daniel Muchayi from Gokwe has served for 31 years while Mrs Netsai Makonese and Mr Vengai Robson Revai both stationed in Zvishavane received long service awards for 30 and 33 years respectively. — @mashnets @ncubeleon, @pchitumba1 @DubeMatutu @moyanajnr