The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
NATIONAL Arts Merit Awards (Nama) 2020 Outstanding Artist in the Diaspora, Vusa Mkhaya has added three singles to his forthcoming 10-track album that he is re-launching on June 26. The album which was formerly titled Umanyayatha will now be re-launched under Canada’s internationally acclaimed music label Naxos Records under the name Umanyanyatha – Songs of the Soul of Zimbabwe. The album consists of tracks released in 2016, Mayibabo, Manyanyatha, Lizobuya, Lalela, Siyeza, Uthando, Bayakhala, Naisiyai, Abalalanga and Zhiya while the new tracks are Ubuntu, Africa and Kudala. Speaking from his base in Vienna, Austria, Mkhaya said the songs on the album were inspired by life events. He said he is re-launching the album because of his deal with Naxos Records. “The album is being re-launched because a renowned world music label will be marketing and distributing it worldwide. The previous release was independent and although they have come on board as a marketing figure, the production still remains Mkhaya Music Production property,” said Mkhaya. The album which will be available on iTunes, Spotify and other online music stores globally, according to Mkhaya is a must listen to. “The song Africa has a rhythmic buoyancy that carries messages of hope and unity for the people while Ubuntu layers my melodic vocals over piano, bass-riffs and evocative harmonies. The wholesome lyrics are poignant against a song that is both delicate and resounding in its message. “Uthando (Love) takes a cheerful turn with percussion and guitar lending a summery vibe to soft, breezy vocals,” he said. Vusa Mkhaya broke into the music scene through the much-celebrated outfit Insingizi which rose to fame with their 2004 debut album, Voices of Southern Africa/Spirit of Africa that has so far sold over 250 000 units in North America. Having gone solo, Vusa Mkhaya’s released albums, The Spirit of Ubuntu (2006), Vocalism (2012) and Umanyanyatha (2016). Most of his works are emotive musical stories of love, heartbreak and everyday living tales delivered in soulful and sometimes haunting and achingly beautiful pieces. – @mthabisi_mthire.