The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
THE Government will not let the Covid-19 pandemic derail infrastructural development projects in the country as they are key to economic expansion. Covid-19 has impacted negatively on global economies, with most countries projecting a shrink in economic output. Zimbabwe’s sanctions-hit economy has not been spared from the effects of Covid-19. The Government says in view of devastating impact of Covid-19, the country still requires to forge ahead with infrastructural development projects such as road rehabilitation works. Transport and Infrastructural Development Minister Joel Biggie Matiza last week toured unfinished road rehabilitation works along the Bulawayo-Nkayi Road and the Bulawayo-Tsholotsho Road, pledging Government’s commitment to ensure that the roads are rehabilitated to the satisfaction of the public. Government is working on expanding the potholed strip roads up to Nkayi and Tsholotsho respectively. Matabeleland North Minister for State for Provincial Affairs Richard Moyo and transport ministry engineers were part of the tour. The engineers outlined their plans towards completion of the suspended works in the province. They revealed that upon completing the 2km stretch under rehabilitation along the Bulawayo-Victoria Falls road by Tuesday they will move to Bulawayo-Tsholotsho Road and complete works within 10 days. After that they will proceed to the Bulawayo-Nkayi road and work on the outstanding projects. The rehabilitation works on the roads were suspended last year due to delays by Treasury to release funds. The Government has since procured road rehabilitation materials inclusive of gravel and tarmac to wrap up the outstanding road works. Minister Matiza drove to Kwekwe via the Bulawayo-Nkayi Road saying he wanted to have a personal experience as to why there is an outcry over the dilapidated strip Bulawayo-Nkayi road. He said even during the Covid-19 pandemic, President Mnangagwa wants to see progress in infrastructure development as this is linked to economic progress. “It is the President’s wish to ensure that roads countrywide are done. That is why priority is given now even during Covid-19 to fix some of the major roads. We are getting support to complete roads that were on-going. Nkayi Road is one of the roads that needs to be completed. Government is moving forward to ensure that we finish this road,” he said. “It is an economic road, it is vital to the region, it is vital to the province. It needs to be completed. I’m happy that work is going on. What we might need to do is to accelerate the works. That is what His Excellency wants to see. Covid-19 should not derail infrastructural development.” Minister Matiza who made a stop at the rehabilitated Ingwigwizi Bridge in Bubi district, revealed that President Mnangagwa would soon commission the bridge. He said the completion in the rehabilitation of the bridge was proof that Zanu-PF was delivering on its election promises. Minister Matiza said Covid-19 has affected some of the road construction contracts that Government was finalising on with the private sector. He said Government is working on how best to remodel the deals in view of the effects of the global pandemic. Speaking during the same tour, Minister Moyo said it was encouraging that Government was committed to fixing roads in the province. He said while progress might be slow, the Government would deliver on promises on service delivery. — @nqotshili