The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
THE first day of the Bulawayo Arts Festival (BAF) on Wednesday had great performances that left those who watched the event on Facebook in awe. However, what was worrying was the viewership of the event on the BAF Facebook page. Between 100 and 200 people watched the live broadcast that started late because of an Internet connectivity fault caused by service provider TelOne. There was a stellar cast with the likes of Selmor Mtukudzi, Nkwali, Mzoe 7, Western Kazinz, theatre group Victory Siyanqoba, Mandla Da Comedian, Bolamba Culture Birds and hip-hop musician Fish McSwagg taking turns to perform. The show was well-packaged and the few who watched were in agreement that it was a great event. The production, curated by Saimon Mambazo, was sequenced and as the show went on, it represented the cosmopolitan nature of the city as different cultures were showcased. The lighting on stage and camera work brought the audience closer to the artistes. Versatile musician Mzoe 7 kick-started the performances with an Afro beat type of song called Quotation that set the mood of the evening. The song is off his upcoming album. Gospel group, Vocal Ex were up next and their performance was enjoyable. Nkwali followed with her traditional dance music with songs such as Nyawo Lami from her album Sithokozile. Victory Siyanqoba came in with an edutainment piece on life and Covid-19 while Western Kazinz brought some Afro pop music with hip-hop musician Fish F Ndaramu also in the mix. It was Ndaramu and poets, Philani Nyoni and Michelle Moyo’s performances that left many people wondering why there were not many people online to watch such a well put together production that showcased untapped talent. The show was capped off by a performance from Selmor Mtukudzi who did not put a foot wrong. Commenting on the show, many said it was good, but lacked an audience. They asked themselves whether it was because the platforms that were used to broadcast the BAF live – City of Bulawayo, CnC Productions and Bluez Café Facebook pages where not popular among many or that people could not afford data, whose prices are quite steep nowadays. It is hoped that yesterday’s event that was slated to be held between 6PM and 8PM had a better viewership as the city’s talent needs to be exposed. The festival ends tonight.