The Chronicle Cassava Fintech International (CFI) and the Liquid Telecom Group (LTG) this week announced the launch of Sasai Wi-Fi Finder, which will be rolled out at thousands of hotspots across Africa. The service, a real potential game-changer in driving digital and financial inclusion in Africa, will see the roll-out of the Sasai Wi-Fi Finder in Zimbabwe, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, Democratic Republic of Congo and South Africa over the coming months. Speaking at the launch of the service, CFI Chief Executive Officer, Mr Darlington Mandivenga said: “We see this launch as a critical piece in the social digital inclusion agenda we are driving on the continent. Through Sasai Wi-Fi Finder, we plan to establish an expansive network of data access points across Africa and build ‘Africa’s Missing Network’ through partnering with broadband providers, Internet Service Providers and local community hubs.” A GSMA report published last year shows that affordability remains a significant barrier to Internet adoption in Africa, resulting in social, digital and financial exclusion. The CFI-LTG partnership to provide Sasai Wi-Fi Finder will therefore go a long way in offering a low-cost solution for connectivity and to expand access to data throughout the continent. Liquid Group Chief Operating Officer Ahmad Mokhles said: “We’re proud that our best-in-class broadband infrastructure network is the backbone of this service and is enabling more Africans to access the digital and financial benefits of the internet. This partnership is providing consumers with affordable Wi-Fi access while local franchisees and partners are able to grow their businesses and the economies of their countries. This is a true example of the transformative power technology can have across the value chain”. The Sasai Wi-Fi Finder will be an in-App feature on the Sasai super App that will allow users to identify hotspots at which they can access affordable data. “We designed this service to be as easy-to-use as possible. A smartphone user will get free connectivity on-the-go through accessing the #SasaiWi-Fi Finder network to download the Sasai App and gain access to a wide range of in-app services,” said Tapera Mushoriwa, Chief Operating Officer of Sasai. “When a new smartphone user has registered on the Sasai App, or when an existing Sasai App user opens the App, they receive automatic notification “pop-up” alerts showing available #SasaiWi-Fi Finder hotspots nearby. They also receive additional services, such as distinct indoor and outdoor Wi-Fi hotspot markers, directions to Wi-Fi hotspots, session usage, range and signal strength details — making it easier than ever before for African users to access the Internet,” Mushoriwa said. The Sasai Wi-Fi Finder will allow greater connectivity in a variety of locations, including retail, health care, education, government and small business trade facilities. The App will also give millions of Africans access to social, entertainment and on-demand services offered on the Sasai super App, including Sasai Moments. The Sasai Wi-Fi Finder is accessible and available by downloading the Sasai super App from the Google Play Store or the Apple Appstore.