The Chronicle Business Reporter
CASSAVA Fintech International (CFI) and the Liquid Telecom Group (LTG) have announced the launch of “Sasai Wi-Fi Finder”, a potential game-changer in driving digital and financial inclusion in Africa. The service, which will be offered across the continent, was announced Tuesday and is set to be rolled at thousands of hotspots across the continent. According to the 2019 report by the GSMA (the Global System for Mobile Communications), affordability remains a significant barrier to internet adoption in Africa, resulting in social, digital and financial exclusion. The Cassava/Liquid partnership seeks to offer a low-cost solution for connectivity and to expand these services throughout the continent, said the CFI group. “We see this launch as a critical piece in the social digital inclusion agenda we are driving on the continent,” said Mr Darlington Mandivenga, the chief executive officer of the CFI Group. “Through Sasai Wi-Fi Finder, we plan to establish an expansive network of data access points across Africa and build ‘Africa’s Missing Network’ through partnering with broadband providers, internet service providers and local community hubs.” Group chief operating officer, Mr Ahmad Mokhles, said they were proud that their broadband infrastructure network was the backbone of the new innovative service and is enabling more Africans to access the digital and financial benefits of the internet. “This partnership is providing consumers with affordable Wi-Fi access while local franchisees and partners are able to grow their businesses and the economies of their countries. This is a true example of the transformative power technology can have across the value chain,” said Mr Mokhles. The “intuitive and easy to use” Sasai Wi-Fi Finder will be an in-App feature on the Sasai super App that will allow users to identify hotspots at which they can access affordable data. “We designed this service to be as easy-to-use as possible. A smartphone user will get free connectivity on-the-go through accessing the #SasaiWi-Fi Finder network to download the Sasai App and gain access to a wide range of in-app services,” said Mr Tapera Mushoriwa, chief operating officer of Sasai. “When a new smartphone user has registered on the Sasai App, or when an existing Sasai App user opens the App, they receive automatic notification “pop-up” alerts showing available #SasaiWi-Fi Finder hotspots nearby. They also receive additional services, such as distinct indoor and outdoor Wi-Fi hotspot markers, directions to Wi-Fi hotspots, session usage, range and signal strength details — making it easier than ever before for African users to access the Internet,” said Mr Mushoriwa. The Sasai Wi-Fi Finder will allow greater connectivity in a variety of locations, including retail, health care, education, government and small business trade facilities. The App will also give millions of Africans access to social, entertainment and on-demand services offered on the Sasai super App, including Sasai Moments. The partnership between CFI and LTG, both subsidiaries of the Econet Global Group, will see the roll-out of the Sasai Wi-Fi Finder in Zimbabwe, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, Democratic Republic of Congo and South Africa in phases over the coming months. Cassava FinTech is a pan-African business using an integrated model to drive financial inclusion and digital transactions across the continent. Liquid Telecom is a leading communications solutions provider across 13 countries primarily in Eastern, Southern and South Africa that serves mobile operators, carriers, enterprise, media and content companies and retail customers.