The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
HIGHLANDERS are seized with tracking former players in a bid to clear outstanding debts the club owes them. Some of the former players the club is searching for turned out for Bosso more than a decade ago. The list of former players and backroom staff the club owes, has among other notable names Gilbert Banda, the last captain to lead Bosso to the league title in 2006, as well Chipo Tsodzo. The club owes 71 individuals money. Highlanders were expecting to pay off the last batch of its creditors on Tuesday, but they have failed to meet their self-imposed deadline, as they battle to track down their creditors. Bosso followers led by South Africa-based member Nodumo Nyathi embarked on a debt clearance campaign in May to help the club extinguish its legacy debt, which stood at $862 868. The three-month campaign raised a total of $825 950 plus US$1 736. Club spokesperson Ronald Moyo said they were making progress in tracing some of the creditors. “As you are aware, this is a legacy debt we are dealing with and some of the creditors have either changed numbers or have left the country. After receiving the final contributions from the campaign last week, the club had hoped to finalise clearance of the debt this week. Frantic efforts are being made to get hold of those we owe, but whose contacts are not available,” said Moyo. Chronicle Sport gleaned the list of former players and officials the club owes. It includes TelOne FC midfielder Simon Munawa, who left the club in 2017, ex-Highlanders juniors’ coach Reuben Tsengwa, former goalkeeper Njabulo Nyoni and former team manager and secretary-general Emmett Ndlovu Ex-Orlando Pirates forward Ralph Mathema, former captain Honest Moyo, who is now plying his trade in the South Africa National First Division, Brighton Choto, Richard Choruma as well as India-based Simbarashe Gate are all owed by the club. The list also includes unheralded players such as Arnott Malaba, Melody Mpofu, Bobby Nkomo, Snowden Phiri and Lovemore Unganai. Others include Wellington Sibanda, who left the club a decade ago, Vincent Nzombe, Mthulisi Maphosa, Menard Mupera and United Kingdom-based Milton Ncube. — @ZililoR