The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
POLICE in Matabeleland North are investigating a case where a suspected gang of thieves armed with machetes and knobkerries allegedly robbed a motorist at night near Cross Dete along the Bulawayo-Victoria Falls highway. The unidentified suspects who were all wearing face masks went away with two wheels, car battery, $3 000, US$200, cellphone, passport and other identity documents belonging to Mr Sungani Ncube (28). Mr Ncube of Lambo Village under Chief Nekatambe in Dete was driving a Honda Fit towards Hwange from Bulawayo when he reportedly parked on the roadside to rest at around 11pm last Friday. Matabeleland North police spokesperson Chief Inspector Siphiwe Makonese said the suspects who were driving in a Toyota Wish pounced on Mr Ncube and smashed the front windscreen with a knobkerrie forcing him to flee leaving the car behind. “We are investigating a case where seven unknown male adults robbed the complainant Mr Sungani Ncube near Cross Dete and went away with valuables,” said Chief Insp Makonese. “On the 14th of August around 11pm the complainant was driving a black Honda Fit vehicle with temporary registration numbers. Upon reaching the 284km peg just after Cross Dete business centre, the complainant who was alone pulled off the road for recess. “As he switched off the engine, a vehicle approached from the direction of Hwange and slowed down. He noticed that it was a black Toyota Wish without number plates. “The vehicle parked blocking his way and about seven men wearing face masks disembarked from the vehicle,” said Chief Insp Makonese. She said one of the suspects was carrying a machete while another had a knobkerrie and the third one, a screw driver as they approached Mr Ncube’s car. Mr Ncube reportedly locked the doors and turned the ignition on in an attempt to drive off but one of the gang members smashed the windscreen with a knobkerrie. The suspects demanded cash and valuables. Mr Ncube turned off the engine and bolted out of the vehicle taking only the car keys with him. One of the suspects gave chase but Mr Ncube outpaced him and hid in a nearby bush. After some time Mr Ncube allegedly saw the suspects’ vehicle driving off towards Bulawayo and he walked back to his car. He found that the left rear wheel had been removed and taken away together with a spare wheel, battery, $3 000, US$200 cash, cellphone, passport and other identity documents Mr Ncube sought help from a nearby homestead to pull the vehicle from the road before making a report on Saturday. No arrest has been made.-@ncubeleon.