The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
BULAWAYO City Council (BCC) has said it will not follow the water shedding exercise schedule in place for the next six days due to water pumping challenges after thieves stole copper cables leading to Inyakuni Dam pump boosters. The development has resulted in the city losing 18 megalitres (ML) daily at a time when supplies are already constrained. The city requires an average of 150 ML of water per day but due to low dam water levels, it is pumping nearly 100M/L per day resulting in some suburbs going for months without water. BCC is implementing a six-day water shedding exercise as it tries manage dwindling water levels at the city’s dams following two successive poor rainfall seasons.
Water challenges saw an outbreak of typhoid and dysentery in Luveve and surrounding areas leading to the death of 13 people recently. In a statement, Town Clerk Mr Christopher Dube said the theft of copper cables will disrupt normal pumping of water to the city, thereby adversely impacting the scheduled water shedding exercise. “The City of Bulawayo would like to advise members of the public of water supply interruption to all areas in the city for the next five-six days outside the water shedding schedule. The interruption is due to the theft of electricity cables that supply power to one of the city’s remaining three surface raw water sources (Inyankuni Dam Booster Station),” said Mr Dube. He said the Zimbabwe Electricity Transmission and Distribution Company (ZETDC) is working to restore power as soon as possible, although damage has already been done. Mr Dube said water supplies will be erratic while the parastatal works to normalise the situation. “The loss of pumping from lnyankuni Dam will lead to even lower water abstraction volumes resulting to a daily loss of 18 ML/day to a system that is already struggling to meet current demand following the past two consecutive poor rainfall seasons. Residents are advised that council may face challenges in adhering to the 144-hour water shedding programme currently in place. Water supply during the period will be determined through reservoir levels till power is restored to lnyankuni Dam,” said Mr Dube. The city’s senior public relations officer Mrs Nesisa Mpofu urged residents to use water sparingly while utilising boreholes to augment supplies. She said areas receiving water through bowsers will continue to receive supplies on schedule. — @nqotshili