The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma in Hwange
ZIMBABWE is making strides towards bridging the digital divide between urban and rural communities with Government facilitating establishment of more base stations in remote areas across the country so as to increase network connectivity. The drive is part of Government’s commitment to create a knowledge-based economy hence the establishment of more Community Information Centres (CICs) across the country. Yesterday Government officially launched the Hwange CIC after the same facility was launched in Chinotimba suburb, Victoria Falls, last month. The digital facilities will enable communities to engage through internet connection and communities will also have access to related cheaper services such as binding, photocopying and laminating. Speaking during the launch on behalf of Minister of ICT, Postal and Courier Services, Dr Jenfan Muswere, at Hwange Zimpost, his deputy, Dingumuzi Phuthi, said the digital sphere was a game changer in facilitating robust development in Zimbabwe despite the Covid-19 setback. “Indeed digital technologies have become indispensable in almost every aspect of human endeavour. Post Covid-19 era, digital technologies will continue to play a pivotal role as we enter the ‘Decade of Action’ to address the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030,” said Deputy Minister Phuthi. “As Government we play a crucial role in shaping that transformation by ensuring equitable access to digital technologies by all citizens, including those in remote areas of the country. “I therefore, would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm Government’s commitment to addressing and reducing the barriers to technology and the digital divide through participatory policies and programmes.”
Hwange CIC is one of the 146 CICs that have been established throughout the country. To date, 114 of these CICs are already operational, with 14 of them providing free training in the use of computers to members of the community. The Deputy Minister said Potraz was a strategic agency in ensuring that rural communities are kept abreast of technological development to enable them to participate in the digital economy. “As Government one of our key objectives is to build a knowledge-based economy where knowledge, creativity and innovation will play an important role in generating and sustaining economic growth,” he said. “We are, therefore, fully committed to providing stakeholders with opportunities to develop the sector and to make ICTs one of the key pillars of the economy.” To buttress the digital investments being championed by Government and the private sector, Deputy Minister Phuthi said a comprehensive computer training programme will be rolled out to ensure full utilisation of the ICT infrastructure in the country. He challenged the youths to make use of the availed facilities to unlock economic opportunities. Speaking on behalf of Potraz director general, Dr Gift Machengete, Potraz deputy director general, Mr Alfred Marisa, said the launch of CICs enables remote communities to fully participate in national development. “The business and farming communities can take advantage of the new wave of digital marketing and e-commerce to market and sell their commodities on the various digital platforms available,” he said. Apart from setting up CICs, Mr Marisa said Potraz was also assisting in the fight against Covid-19 by co-ordinating ICT industry efforts towards equipping the two national Covid-19 call centres established by the Ministry of Health and Child Care and the Ministry of Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services. Minister of State for Matabeleland North Provincial Affairs and Devolution, Richard Moyo, paid tribute to Potraz and stressed the need to bring services closer to communities. ICT Ministry secretary, Dr Engineer Sam Kundishora, traditional leaders and senior Government officials, attended the launch. — @mthabisi_mthire.