The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Up-and-coming South Africa-based musician Tsepiso Phuti believes that music is her first love as it brings peace and tranquillity to her life and soul. Calling herself a crossover musician because she does not want to box herself in a genre, Tsepiso grew up in Bulawayo. The mother of one did her primary school education at Mtshane and Mgiqika and attended Nkulumane, Wanezi and Nyathi High schools. A real estate agent by profession for a South African company, Tsepiso’s song Uthando emoyeni is in the top five on Skyz Metro FM’s top 20 chart show. Tsepiso said music gives her a tranquil feeling. “I’m driven by passion and the love I have for music, there is something magical about music that makes my heart and soul feel at peace,” said Tsepiso. “Most of my songs are inspired by love because I believe if everyone loved one another, the world would be the safest place to be.” Tsepiso said she does any music and does not want to be boxed from a tender age. “I’ve always been passionate about the arts industry from a tender age. As a songwriter I don’t really want to be boxed under one particular genre because I enjoy experimenting with music across genres. “I think music now is evolving and everyday there is always something new to learn and for me it’s a really great experience because I love learning,” said Tsepiso. She has eight songs to her name, but is in the process of redoing some because they did not do well. “My first musical work was in 2019, that is when I actually started recording. I did eight songs for my first album but only two were successful and I’m in the process of redoing them on a more professional production level. I also have a follow up single,” said Tsepiso. She worked with Isithende and Tronix having been a dancer for the former before the group split in 2007. “Being a dancer was great and also educational because not only did I enjoy being on stage, we also got to tour different places around Zimbabwe. I was dancing for Isithende and I stopped dancing when the group fell apart for reasons I can’t reveal. I can’t say I left dancing for singing because in Isithende we sang as well and wanting to pursue singing now is basically continuing something that I’ve always loved doing,” said Tsepiso. After the group split Tsepiso moved to South Africa to seek greener pastures and provide for her child. “I was doing nothing musically. And I became a mother and the desire to provide for my child brought me to South Africa in search of greener pastures. When I got here, I literally put arts on a hold because I was still finding my feet financially,” said Tsepiso. Then two years ago she decided to pursue her passion, albeit by chance. “I started recording in December 2018. A friend of mine is married to a producer so one day while I was visiting, he was busy in studio and the artiste he was busy with needed a backing vocalist and I jumped in to help out and the rest is history,” said Tsepiso. “I’m busy in studio so definitely more music and a collaboration or two can be expected from me, and also a lot of public appearances after these unprecedented times are over,” said Tsepiso. Those who want to see her works can go to her Facebook page Tsepiso Tsepie Phuti, Tsepiso Tsepie on Instagram and Tsepiso Phuti on YouTube. Follow on Twitter @bonganinkunzi.