The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Old Mutual’s Amazing Voices finalists, gospel outfit Focus Acapella, is set to launch its debut nine-track album this Friday. Titled In my heart, the album by the Bulawayo group will be launched online as public shows still remain banned due to the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic. Focus Acapella was one of the groups that participated at the Pan-African singing competition that held its finals earlier this year. Unfortunately, they were the first ones to be eliminated at the finals in Johannesburg, South Africa. But, with the experience they gained from the competition that was won by Kenyan RnB group, Wanavokali, the group returned home and worked on their debut album. Now, they are ready to share the album with the rest of the world through a launch on their Facebook page. The launch which kicks off at 8PM on Friday will run concurrently with a Virtual Singing session by the group. The group’s manager, Lawrence Mpatsi said the album is premised on the Biblical scripture of Psalms 119 vs 105. “The song In my heart is inspired by the scripture passage found in the book of Psalms 119 vs 105 where we are asking God to let His word be born in our hearts, to shape us and mould us into newness of characters fit for Heaven. The album brings hope and togetherness, with hope that the world becomes a better place,” said Mpatsi. He said the album has a fusion of new tracks as well as some they had composed earlier, but never got the chance to record them. “The album has some songs we wrote over a decade ago, but had not been released. But now, we feel it’s the right time for the world to hear the Focus Acapella sound. “In my heart presents iconic tracks from the group’s history, showcasing the fresh arrangements, stunning singing and instant musical appeal for which the group has become renowned for.” Tracks on the album include Mzuli, Brighter Morning Star, Jesus is Coming, In My Heart (composed and arranged by Eric Mutasa), My Help, Woza Mkhululi, I Know, Uze Ungikhumbule (tribute to Jasper Ministries) and National Anthem of Zimbabwe. Mpatsi said they want the world to know about the group hence they are launching the album online. “Launching the album online is our way of sharing our music with the world. The world has become such a small place with the Internet as we can reach different corners of the globe effortlessly. We’ve been in music game for about 11 years as a group but never had the opportunity to put our music out there,” said Mpatsi. The group met in 2009 as youth at Pelandaba Seventh Day Adventist Church in Bulawayo. They began to sing together and began their musical journey. Eleven years later, they are still going strong together. Other than participating in the Amazing Voices competition, the group also took part in the Standard Bank Namibia Buy a Brick Concert in 2019. They have also performed at the Bulawayo Jazz Festival and Intwasa Arts Festival koBulawayo.