The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo
ZIMBABWEAN women played a pivotal role during the country’s liberation struggle despite having been viewed as passive members of society who played second fiddle to their male counterparts. As we join the nation in commemorating Heroes and Defence Forces Day, yesterday and today respectively — we profile some of our national heroines who lie buried at the National Heroes Acre in Harare. Female luminaries of the struggle at the shrine include the legendary Amai Sally Mugabe, Mama Johanna Mafuyana the late Father Zimbabwe Joshua Nkomo’s wife, Cde Julia Zvobgo, Cde Ruth Chinamano and Cde Sabina Mugabe. These women played a crucial role during Zimbabwe’s liberation struggle as well as in post-independent Zimbabwe and enjoy the same recognition as their male counterparts. Cde Sarah Francesca Mugabe affectionately known as Sally Mugabe was married to former President Mr Robert Mugabe. She died in 1992. She was born in Ghana in 1931. Amai Sally and her twin sister Esther were raised in a political family, which was part of the growing nationalist politics in colonial Ghana. She went to Achimota Secondary School before qualifying as a teacher. Amai Sally asserted her position as an independent political activist and campaigner. Her passionate work was demonstrated as early as 1962 when she was active in mobilising African women to challenge Ian Smith’s Rhodesian constitution which resulted in her being charged with sedition and sentenced to five years imprisonment, part of which was suspended. In 1978, she was elected Zanu-PF deputy secretary for the Women’s League and was later elected Secretary-General of the Zanu-PF Women’s League at the Party’s Congress of 1989. She died on January 27, 1992 after succumbing to kidney failure. She was buried at the National Heroes Acre in Harare. Another notable woman is the late Cde Sabina Mugabe who was born on October 14, 1934 and died on July 29, 2010. She was the younger sister to the late former President Mugabe. She served as the Member of Parliament for Makonde East from 1985 to 1990 and for Zvimba South from 1990 to 2008. Cde Sabina Mugabe died in Harare aged 75 following a long illness. She is one of the courageous women who took it upon themselves to be involved in the politics of this country. Cde Julia Tukai Zvobgo was the wife of the late Cde Eddison Zvobgo. Cde Julia Zvobgo was born on November 8, 1937 in Shurugwi and died on February 16, 2004 in Harare. Cde Julia Zvobgo’s political career dates back to the early 1960s when she was elected secretary of the women’s branch in the sprawling Highfields Township in Harare. She gained two degrees before leaving for Mozambique with her husband, where she was appointed administrator in charge of women in the military camps. Upon her passing, she was buried at the National Heroes Acre on February 19, 2004. Ruth Lottie Nomondo Chinamano was born on January 16, 1925 in Cape Town, South Africa and died on January 2, 2005. She is another of our national heroines buried at the national shrine. Cde Ruth Chinamano met the Zimbabwean nationalist Cde Josiah Chinamano (who is also a national hero) in 1949 while on holiday in Port Elizabeth and the two were married in 1950. In 1955, Cde Chinamano accompanied her husband to Birmingham, United Kingdom, where she took part in a number of political meetings. She studied and practised community development for six months when her husband returned to Zimbabwe. On returning to Zimbabwe, she taught at Waddilove Institute near Marondera. Together with a few other women, Cde Chinamano staged the first “black sash” demonstration against the detention of veteran nationalists James Chikerema, Daniel Madzimbamuto, George Nyandoro and many others. In 1964, she was detained at Gonakudzingwa Restriction Camp near the Zimbabwe/ Mozambique border together with her husband and spent the next decade in and out of detention. She and her husband were transferred from Gonakudzingwa to Wha Wha Prison, outside Gweru, where they remained until 1970, when they were released but confined to an eight-kilometre radius restriction before being arrested again and released in 1974. She was elected into Parliament in 1980. Cde Ruth Chinamano was a selfless unwavering Zanu-PF cadre. Born in Matobo on September 18, 1927, Cde Johanna Nkomo, affectionately known as Mama Mafuyana; was brought up in a richly grounded African culture and values which prepared her for her future role as a wife to a leading founder and maker of our nation, the departed Father Zimbabwe, Cde Joshua Nkomo. She attended St Joseph’s Primary School before proceeding to work for the Dominican Sisters Convent in Bulawayo as a girl’s matron. This is where she met Cde Nkomo and the two later got married in 1949. Behind the illustrious revolutionary commitment and leadership of the late Father Zimbabwe was this steadfast mother of the nation, Mama Mafuyana who scoffed at risks and made enormous sacrifices which have remained untold. Mama Mafuyana’s marriage to a nationalist made her a prime target for the colonial regime. Her job was to take care of their children and make sure they were secure while her husband was in and out of detention. At independence up to her death, Mama Mafuyana worked for the unity of all Zimbabweans, mostly for the welfare of underprivileged children through the Child Survival and Development Foundation. She died on June 3, 2003 and is buried at the national shrine in Harare.