The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Iyasa’s Credisi project which seeks to celebrate the city’s artistic diversity and talent will this month feature performances from Sweet Mobby, Qeqe, DJ Prince Eskhosini, Mzistozz, Shekinah and Soul Dudes. The monthly show taking place next Saturday is in its 10th edition with two shows left before the project is wrapped up. Reflecting on the project, Credisi co-producer, Nkululeko “Nkue” Nkala said it was initiated to give artistes from Bulawayo, especially those who have never got the opportunity to perform on big stages, a platform to shine. He said he is impressed with the response the shows, which are now being shown online due to the lockdown, have received. Having begun in August last year, the shows took place at different BCC community halls in high density suburbs as part of efforts to revive the halls. In March this year, the shows had to be stopped due to the ban of public gatherings. They resumed in April where they were conducted online. Nine shows have so far been held with four of them being held virtually. Four workshops have been conducted to empower artistes. “From when we started staging the shows online, Credisi showed there was a need for arts consumption. We hit high numbers at every turn and afforded many creatives an opportunity, especially those barely known. “During the live performances, people got to know of City Council spaces in their communities and we’re happy to have been part of the movement that created an online culture for both artistes and creatives,” Nkala said. For this month’s edition, Nkala said: “We’ll be shining a light on Soul Dudes, an amazing dance outfit while Mzistozz and Shekinah have new music which they will be promoting. “Songstress Sweet Mobby is an inspiration as she continues to sing even after her 9 to 5 job at Zimbabwe Prison Correctional Services.” Chronicle Showbiz caught up with some artistes who have graced the event over the months and they hailed organisers for the show’s productivity. Khaya Arts director, Future Dube said: “We performed at Entumbane hall alongside Iyasa and we had a good time sharing the stage with the big guys. Also, the show was well marketed and it gave us good mileage as the show attracted a lot of people who thronged the hall.” Desire “Moyoxide” Moyo, leader of Victory Siyanqoba, said the show at Nkulumane Hall earlier this year connected them with audiences. One of the artistes who was part of the show’s online performances, rapper Msiz’Kay said performing on that platform exposed him to the virtual world. “Credisi was a vibe and it was good for me as a performer as it helped me see how best to prepare for online shows and how to get the best response from an online audience,” Msiz’Kay said. – @mthabisi_mthire.