The Chronicle Master KG’s dream of reaching 100 million streams on YouTube with his hit, Jerusalema has become a reality, just months after he set the goal. Jerusalema, a song which features Nomcebo Zikode is easily the biggest SA export this year, topping charts around the world and spawning a viral dance challenge. It has been streamed from Cape Town to Calcutta and on Wednesday, reached 100 million views on YouTube. Taking to Twitter, Master KG who grew up in Calais Village in Limpopo, was over the moon about the accomplishment. “I still can’t believe it. Thank you world for making it possible,” he wrote. In a statement to TshisaLIVE, Master KG said he was thrilled to see Jerusalema breaking records and inspiring people all over the world. “This is just amazing. It’s also humbling to see the speed at which it travels. When we reached 50 million views last month, nobody would have predicted that in four weeks, it would have doubled. This is testament that when Jesus says yes, nobody can say no. This has gone beyond us and it’s marvellous to watch.” Vocalist Zikode told TshisaLIVE that she was overwhelmed by the love she was getting. “I am so happy. It hasn’t sunk in yet. It feels like a dream. I am so happy that SA can celebrate this together. I don’t know what it is that made it so big, but we are so grateful for every single stream we got.
“This is a big moment for all of us as a country and we must celebrate it.” Master KG told TshisaLIVE last month that he was humbled by the response to the song from fans across the world. “It’s so beautiful to see how Jerusalema has taken over the world, to see how far it has gone. The song did amazing at home, in December 2019 charting on each and every radio station. It ruled the streets and people created memories to the song.” Celebrities including Cassper Nyovest, Bonang and DJ Fresh, joined thousands of South Africans in congratulating Master KG on the accomplishment. Master KG who is working closely with Zimbabwean urban grooves musician Nox these days is definitely destined for greater heights. His album Skeleton Move that was released in 2018 achieved acclaim including an AFRIMMA Award for Best Artist/Group in the African Electro category. He has collaborated with a number of artistes including Zanda Zakuza and Makhadzi and is also known as the pioneer of “Balobedu” dance. — Sowetan.