The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
FOUR men have appeared in court facing 18 counts of theft after they broke into several cars in Gwanda and stole property including batteries, speakers and amplifiers worth R30 000. Karabo Ncube (21), Thembani Ndlovu (20), Enock Maungu (35) and William Ndlovu (34) all from Spitzkop North suburb were not asked to plead when they appeared before Gwanda magistrate, Mr Ndumiso Khumalo facing 18 counts of theft. They were remanded in custody to September 3. Prosecuting, Mr Noel Mandebvu said the gang broke into several vehicles at night during the period stretching from February to August and they stole over 25 car batteries among other property. Sometime in February the accused persons went to Mr Mgcini Mpunzi’s house while he was asleep and stole a wheelbarrow which was in the yard. In March they went back to Mr Mpunzi’s house where they took 22 zinc roofing sheets, a 12-volt Exide car battery, a FunCargo hub and a shifting spanner. Mr Mandebvu said sometime in April the accused persons went to seven different homes where they took eight 12-volt car batteries, an amplifier, two speakers and a Samsung cellphone. “On 27 June the accused persons went to Mduduzi Siziba’s house where they opened a passenger’s side window which was partially open and stole an Exide car battery. On the following day they went to Mr Daniel Mahlangu’s home where they removed two Exide batteries from a Hino four-tonne truck and fled. On 13 July they went to Mr Kanos Mutero’s house where they used an unknown object to cut off the battery holders of his vehicle and they took a 12-volt Exide battery,” he said. Mr Mandebvu said on July 17 the accused persons went to Mr Mufowabo Mpunzi’s house where they broke a passenger window of his vehicle and stole a 12-volt Willard battery and a car radio. He said the gang also went to another house during the same month where they stole two 12-volt batteries. Mr Mandebvu said on August 3 the gang went to Mr Ntuseng Moyo’s home where they stole two 12 volt Exide batteries. “Sometime in August the accused persons went to Mr Melusi Mpofu’s home where they used an unknown object to open the bonnet of his vehicle and stole a battery. During the same month they went to Mr Anold Makaranga’s home where they stole a car battery from his vehicle,” he said. “The accused persons went on to commit a series of theft from motor vehicles at several other homes in Gwanda where they stole car batteries, sub-woofer speakers, fuel, drums and gas tanks.” Mr Mandebvu said 13 car batteries worth R21 000 were recovered from the accused persons. — DubeMatutu