The Chronicle Messages of condolence from some of SA’s celebs have been pouring in after the death of veteran radio personality Bob Mabena. Affectionately known as Uncle Bob, the 51-year-old died on Monday from cardiac arrest. “It is with deep grief and pain that we announce that Power 98.7 Breakfast Host, Mr Bob Mabena passed away this afternoon, Monday 10 August 2020, from cardiac arrest,” read a statement confirming his death. His death came just a few weeks after the death of his grandmother, who succumbed to Covid-19. Mabena has been hailed as an icon and legend of broadcasting, after 31 years in the industry. He worked at radio stations such as Metro FM, Highveld Stereo and Kaya FM. Most recently he was working as the breakfast show host at Power 98.7, where he was also the station manager. On social media, celeb and industry professionals paid tribute to Bob and also shared some of their fond memories of him. Legendary DJ, Oscar “Oskido” Mdlongwa said Mabena’s passing death had left him with a heavy heart, while DJ Fresh said he was hurt by the news. SA Sports, arts and culture minister Nathi Mthethwa also sent his condolences, saying the industry has lost a giant. “Bob Mabena wove a remarkable thread across the tapestry of the SA media landscape. He was a giant who left an indelible mark in music, arts and broadcasting.” DJ Cleo told TshisaLIVE that he idolised the star and used to have a centrefold of him on his wall. “Growing up, I had a centrefold poster of his in my room in 1993. I used to watch him on SABC1’s Studio Mix in 1995/96. I aspired to be like all the acts featured on the show. I still have VHS video tapes of it,” he revealed. Cleo was lucky to share a stage with Bob at a show in Alex in 1999, and the DJ said he was star-struck. In 2018 he was interviewed by Bob at the Mzansi Viewer’s Choice Awards and said he would never forget how incredible the moment was. “It was a surreal moment and I made sure he knows exactly how I felt at that moment. I’m at a loss for words, he was an idol to many and I’m saddened by his passing,” Cleo added. He said that while Bob’s death had left a massive void in the entertainment industry and in the hearts of fans and friends, the star had “done and lived his life to the fullest”. “If I had one last moment with him I don’t know what I would say. He has really done it all. Maybe ‘just live longer for your kids’.” – TshisaLive.