The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Chronicle Reporter
BULAWAYO residents have been challenged to adopt behaviour that will arrest the high number of Covid-19 cases and deaths recorded in the city. A majority of Bulawayo residents appear to believe the deadly pandemic does not exist and often disregard Government measures to prevent new infections. Residents do not want to stay indoors and most do not observe social distancing in their daily activities. Bulawayo mayor Councillor Solomon Mguni, speaking during a donation of PPEs by the Zimbabwe Humanitarian and Livelihoods Development Trust yesterday, said the rate of new infections was worrying. According to a Ministry of Health and Child Care report on Wednesday, Bulawayo province had the second highest number of Covid-19 deaths which are more than a quarter of the national average. On Tuesday, the city recorded its 21st death after a 22-year-old man succumbed to the global pandemic in one of the health institutions. The country’s Covid-19 death toll was at 81 while a total of 4 221 people have been infected. Of the 81 deaths, Harare has the highest at 39, followed by Bulawayo 21 and 1 065 Covid-19 cases. “The city has noted with concern that the number of cases continue to rise and more residents are succumbing to the virus. We need to all actively work together to curb the virus and get tested as soon as we show symptoms. Let us also remember not to stigmatise members of our community who will have contracted Covid-19 but help them to fight and win against the virus,” he said. Cllr Mguni hailed the various organisations that have continued to donate to the city in the fight against Covid 19. “It is partnerships like these that have also seen the distribution of non-food items by different non-governmental organisations to help families and communities fight Covid-19,” he said. The director of Zimbabwe Humanitarian and Livelihoods Development Trust, Mr Norbet Dube, said the organisation will be involved in community awareness campaigns encouraging people to follow WHO guidelines in preventing the virus. “The most critical issue that we want to do apart from this donation is awareness raising. There has been a lot of going back and forth between the public and authorities in trying to observe Covid-19 conditions but we seem to be fighting a losing battle. There is serious lack of following some of the requirements. People are putting facemasks but they are doing it as an enforcement issue not from deep down,” said Mr Dube. He said there is need for the public to adhere to social distancing regulations. “Social distancing is still troublesome. walk to any bank or the market areas there is too much overcrowding. We’ll work with social workers in the city and from the wards to address the mindset, attitude and behavioural change so that people get used to the new normal,” he said. – @themkhust_ncube