The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
ITCHING for a return to the ring, South Africa-based Zimbabwean heavyweight pugilist Elvis Moyo is hoping that scaling down of that country’s lockdown to Level 2 will soon result in the opening of borders to enhance his chances of travelling for fights. Moyo says he will not rush to return to the gym and will continue training at the park while awaiting confirmation of his next fight that is likely to be in Dubai. He kept himself busy during the lockdown by training at home and says he will only return to the gym in three weeks’ time and intends to use this period to monitor how the fitness centres cope with the new normal. The Bulawayo Bomber currently weighs 140kgs, but is confident of shedding off 20kgs once he returns to the gym. “I’ve been idling, trying to stay fit by running at the park during the lockdown. I’m at 140kg and I need to shed off weight because scaling down to Level 2 means there’s a possibility that once borders open, I might get a short notice fight in Dubai. Already, my agents in Kosovo and Kenya said a heavyweight boxer in Dubai has made inquiries about my availability and that fight depends on opening of borders,” said Moyo. He said he will increase the tempo of his training programme once dates for the fight are confirmed. Boxing has resumed in Europe, although intercontinental fights remain banned on the continent and Moyo’s hopes of securing a bill are firmly pinned on the proposed Dubai bout. “Once I start sparring sessions, I’ll only need a maximum of two weeks to shed weight. By running, I’m only doing about 10 percent of proper training and I know that with intensive training, I can lose 20kgs, which is fat and water in a week. “However, despite being 140kg, I still move very fast and you’ll be surprised at things I do,” said Moyo. His ratings have been affected by lack of fights and he is ranked 117th in the world. A March 2020 non-title fight with Ukraine-born heavyweight pugilist Oleksandr Zakhozhyi in Germany was cancelled following outbreak of Covid-19. He had been hoping to get at least three international fights this year and remains hopeful that he’ll return to the ring after lifting of the lockdown. He last fought in May last year when he controversially lost to Arnold Gjergjaj in Sporthalle, Switzerland. Moyo has nine career wins, five losses and two draws. Visa problems prevented him from fighting in Germany and Russia last year after getting short notice invites. His scheduled fight against Evgeny Romanov in Russia was cancelled due to a late visa application in August 2019. A month later he was denied a visa to fight German Hussein Muhammed at Berlin’s Verti Music Hall. — @ZililoR