The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
SOUTH Africa-based Zimbabwean heavyweight boxer Elvis Moyo says lack of corporate backing continues to stifle local boxing development, with most talented pugilists being lost to the sport. Moyo, a former World Boxing Federation (WBF) Africa heavyweight champion, said he had to leave for South Africa to further his career after noticing that his boxing would suffer due to lack of sponsorship. Popularly known as Bulawayo Bomber, Moyo said he is saddened that talented boxers such as former World Boxing Association (WBA) Pan-Africa heavyweight champion Thamsanqa Dube failed to get “meaningful earnings” despite putting the country on the boxing map after beating Jake Els in 2009 to lift the continental title. The pugilist, who also competes in Mixed Martial Arts (MMA), said despite lack of support and appreciation in Zimbabwe, it was pleasing to note that the country continues to churn out exceptional stars like Themba Gorimbo and himself who have established themselves well in MMA. “Look, despite conditions that include neglect or lack of support in our country, we do have some guys that are doing well. “Imagine the impact that boxing stands to benefit if the few guys that have been doing well get sponsorship so that they concentrate on fighting and improve the country’s rankings. Boxing, just like soccer is a viable sport industry that needs support. If our boxers do well on the international stage, it will be easy to groom upcoming stars and get more sponsors,” said Moyo. “What has been happening now is that it’s each man for himself. One has to find his way and stay there to try survive. Remember, if you are in a foreign country like myself, they help you survive but never build you to your full potential,” he said. The Bulawayo Bomber, who was Dube’s sparring partner when the latter won the Pan-Africa heavyweight title in 2009, said he is hurting to see Dube struggling to make ends meet. “In a nutshell, like any other sportperson who would have made it, Zimbabwe failed Thamsanqa Dube. “He went into that bout as an underdog to win the WBA title with the odds staked heavily against him. When he won that title, Zimbabwe should have been proud of his achievement as it had put the country strategically on boxing world map. “There’s no country in Africa with many heavyweights; in Zimbabwe we have about two, Ghana has three or four with South Africa having about three heavyweight boxers.” He said heavyweight boxers are prized possessions and Zimbabwe should have supported Dube by helping him get opponents. Had Dube defended his African title about four times, Moyo believes he would have gotten a big break. “People like the late Proud ‘Kilimanjaro’ Chinembiri and Alfonso Zvenyika got their chances which they utilised back then because they had support from the corporate world,” Moyo said. Kilimanjaro left a record of 32-6, including five wins over local rival Black Tiger in the heavyweight category. He toppled Ghanaians, Zambians, Malians, Ivorians and even one American during his career. At his peak, Kilimanjaro was ranked No 9 by the WBC when Mike Tyson was the undisputed heavyweight champion of the world. Zvenyika won the Commonwealth title during his boxing days. – @ZililoR.