The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
The Eminent in Sports, Music and Academic Awards (Tesma) is calling for entries for its second edition. The awards ceremony seeks to honour outstanding artistes, athletes, students and teachers from Matabeleland South province. The inaugural edition saw artistes from the mining town of Gwanda being awarded at a colourful ceremony that was held at Jahunda Community Hall. This year’s event is expected to be held at Gwanda District Club on December 19. Event organisers, Educational Foundation Trust, said the submission of entries ends on October 30 with the nominees set to be revealed in November. Categories for the awards are Best Gospel song, Best Hip-hop song, Best Reggae song, Best Collaboration, Best Gospel Choir, Best Album of the year, Best Video of the year, Best Song of the year, Best Comedian, Best Kwaito song, Best Music producer, Best Theatre Group, Best Dance Group, Best Maskandi song, Best Afro-pop song, Best Live performance and Lifetime Achievement Award. Other categories are in the academic and sports field namely; Best Grade Seven student, Best O-Level student, Best A-Level student, Best successful teaching record, Humanitarian Award, Provincial Award of Peace, Best Male athlete, Best Female athlete, Best Team of the year, Best Coach of the Year, Junior Sportsperson of the year, Best Paralympic Athlete of the year and Best Paralympic Team of the year. Educational Foundation Trust CEO, Sikholiwe Sibanda said the success of the first edition which mainly focused on personalities from Gwanda, led to organisers spreading the awards to the rest of the province. “The second edition comes after the great success of the inaugural awards ceremony.Our main objective is to cultivate and nurture potential talent through recognition,” said Sibanda. Artistes who emerged winners last year were Cuttie G who won the Song of Year award and Best House Song, Zhezhingtons and Hybrid who bagged the Best Gospel Song accolade, Skollah who won Best Video of the year, The Visionaries who were adjudged the Best New Artist winners and Bry who won Best Reggae Song. – @mthabisi_mthire.