The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
TWO Zimbabwean musicians Lazarus aka Panda Chimina and Kulcat Nkomo aka Courage, together with a Swaziland songstress Nokwanda Dlamini aka Noks Queen LaDlamini have teamed up to form an Afro-pop music outfit called the Major Natives in South Africa. The group which has diverse members from different backgrounds is set to release its first offering, a single titled uThando on August 21. Major Natives was recently signed by Underground Entertainment Label, a stable that is run by a local in South Africa, with Noks Queen LaDlamini being the lead vocalist. The group’s manager, Phakama “PK” Nkomo, who is also the Underground Entertainment manager, said the group’s formation was inspired by the members’ passion and love for music. He said the trio is looking forward to releasing its debut single and are hard at work, shooting visuals for that track. “They’re also working on their first album due to be released before the end of the year. Because of the group’s diversity, their music is a fusion of Afro Pop and hip-hop,” said PK. He said uThando is a love song where a couple expresses their undying love for each other. “It has an Afro Pop feel fused with hip-hop. Its visuals are currently being shot at different locations in Johannesburg and we’re looking forward to sharing them.” Narrating the trio’s musical journey PK said: “The 22-year-old, talented lady Noks Queen LaDlamini is from kaManzini eSwatini. Her love for music started at an early age as she joined the church choir when she was young. That’s where she’s been singing all along until she met the other two. “Lazarus, also aged 22, was born in Plumtree and he also realised his love for music when he was young as he would dance to the sounds of Mokis Connection when he was around eight-years-old. When he was in high school, around Form 3, he started deejaying on weekends in and around townships in Bulawayo until he moved to South Africa soon after finishing his A-Level. That’s when he met the rest of the group after being introduced to Noks Queen LaDlamini by his cousin Courage. “Twenty-year-old Courage was born in Johannesburg although his parents are Zimbabweans. He used to love soccer before trading his boots for the mic after he was introduced to the world of arts where he worked as an administrator officer with Noks Queen LaDlamini at Underground Hillbrow Theatre. “He fell in love with sound engineering, videos, graphics design and live performances and realised he had to pursue arts and follow in his father’s (PK) footsteps,” said PK. PK who manages several artistes from the Underground stable and is on a quest to unleash up-and-coming talent from Southern Africa said Major Natives hopes to become globally acclaimed as they want to emulate their idols, Mafikizolo. As such, they have vowed to churn out hit after hit. – @mthabisi_mthire.