The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
TREASURY has released over $90 million to rural and urban councils in the Midlands province to enhance project development under the devolution agenda. The devolution drive is key Government focus and seeks to ensure achievement of equitable economic development in all the country’s provinces. President Mnangagwa has said that his administration is prioritising devolution in the running of national affairs as a strategy to revitalise the economy and to improve the people’s standards of living. When the Government started implementing the devolution agenda, which is enshrined in the country’s constitution, it envisaged the strategy as a tool for development in all parts of the country. In an interview, Finance and Economic Development Minister Professor Mthuli Ncube said the devolution agenda was a very key issue in terms of Government policy. As such, he said the Midlands province should not be left behind. The minister said to date, rural and urban councils have received a combined $90,2 million, adding that next month, the chunk will be doubled so that more projects being undertaken are completed. Prof Ncube said there should be a notable difference in projects being done by the local authorities now that the Central Government is allocating them financial resources to spearhead the projects. “The rural and urban councils in the Midlands province have been receiving money from Treasury under the devolution agenda. “This is a key issue that must be taken seriously by the local authorities. Chirumhanzu RDC has received $12,6 million, Gokwe North RDC $4,7 million, Gokwe South $8,2 million, Vungu RDC $3,4 million, Zibagwe $3,8 million and Mberengwa $8,9 million. “Tongogara has received $5,9 million, Runde $4,6 million, Gweru City Council $15,1 million Kwekwe $10,1 million, Redcliff municipality $3,1 million, Zvishavane $3,3 million, Gokwe Town council $3,5 million and Shurugwi town council received $3 million. “The total is about $90 million, which has been disbursed to date,” he said. Prof Ncube said Treasury will continue disbursing devolution funds to improve service delivery for the people in both urban and rural areas. “I want to challenge the RDCs to start communicating better because when they get these resources, which come through their parent ministry, which is the Ministry of Local Government, they don’t communicate adequately with local MPs of the area, the local MP has no idea of how much funds have come in under devolution and also that is the information that is supposed to be sent up to the Minister of State for Provincial Affairs and Devolution who also should be in the know,” said Prof Ncube. “I want to urge RDCs to improve their communication to make sure everyone is in the know and is aware of the priority projects they are embarking on or implementing because as Treasury we are busy disbursing funds and the picture is not clear on what they would have done with the funds and we want communication and clarity from the office of the MP to the Minister of State,” he said. Prof Ncube urged the local authorities to improve on communication with relevant authorities as well as in reconciling the funds they would have received and used so that they get more from Treasury so that people’s lives are changed for the better. He said plans are underway to double the allocation for the local authorities in the Midlands province. “We urge them to really do that and we will continue to disburse. I was having a conversation with my team in Treasury to say let’s double the allocation to Midlands province. “Double what we have disbursed because we are seeing that certain projects are lagging behind. Next month we want the projects to move. “That the devolution, treat it seriously, let’s improve the communication and information,” said Prof Ncube.