The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
THE Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education is set to introduce more alternative learning and teaching platforms to ensure pupils learn during the prevailing lockdown where schools remain closed. The ministry in conjunction with ZBC, UNICEF and UNDP has introduced radio lessons for Grade One to Grade Seven learners as part of alternative learning platforms. The ministry recently rolled out the fourth phase of the radio lessons. The lessons are being aired on Radio Zimbabwe, Power FM, Classic 263 and NFM stations. Most learners in rural areas have however been unable to access the lessons as they don’t have access to local radio stations. In an interview the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education spokesperson, Mr Taungana Ndoro said the learning process had to continue even during the lockdown. “Plans are underway to introduce alternative learning and teaching methods during this time when schools remained closed because of the prevailing Covid-19 pandemic. We will avail them once they are ready. As a Ministry we are working on introducing inclusive learning methods for all learners. “Our mantra as a Ministry is that education can’t wait and therefore we will continue to provide school out of school. Education has to continue even during the lockdown. The education system is very important as everyone in the economy has gone through our Ministry. We are the ones who build the economy that is why we have these radio lessons and other learning models that we are working on,” he said. Mr Ndoro said the Ministry was also working on introducing radio lessons for secondary pupils as lessons being aired at the moment were for primary learners. He said a number of parents had heeded the call and learners were utilising the radio lessons. Mr Ndoro said while the radio lessons had some shortcomings they were helpful to learners. Mr Ndoro said the priority of the Ministry was the health and safety of teachers and learners.-@DubeMatutu