The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
IT has been 20 years since Sandra “Sandy” Ndebele burst onto the Zimbabwean entertainment scene. She has stood the test of time and is now celebrating her success story through her ninth album titled Up the Ladder. Sandy who set the stage ablaze on Friday night at Freeman’s show on Nash TV, proved she is an entertainer par excellence. Those who watched the Nash TV show heaped praises on the former Iyasa dancer with some openly saying they were looking forward to her album launch. The multi-talented artiste has been trending on social media with high-definition pictures that have been receiving rave reviews for about as month now. All this has been deliberate as it is meant to keep people glued to her social media pages in preparation for the album launch. The album will be launched on 5 September at 9pm. Starting today, Sandy will be dropping a new song and video daily on her YouTube page. The eight-track album has tracks with the legendary Jeys Marabini, Tocky Vibes, Iyasa and Mzoe 7. Oskid and Vukani produced the album which also features Sandy’s daughter, Zinhle. Speaking ahead of the launch, an excited Sandy said the album is testimony of her progress in the arts industry. “Up the Ladder is the celebration of my continued growth, strength, resilience and longevity as an artiste. This has been a progressive journey for me marked by the amazing support and loyalty that I’ve been shown by millions of followers worldwide,” said Sandy. Explaining the album’s title, she said it captures her music journey which has been a long one. “Ladders are tools we use to get to the top and as with all tools, there is a correct way to use them. You have to go up the ladder carefully, one rung at a time, in order to avoid falling. That’s exactly what this new album represents and embodies. “Each year in my 20 years in the industry, has been a rung that has led me to the top, culminating in this latest offering,” she said. Sandy described the album as one that has something for everyone. “The tracks themselves are a strong mix of soulful ballads and Amapiano that will get everyone on their feet,” she said.