The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
SOUTH Africa-based imbube group, Amavevane Acapella has remade the popular Kubukalanga traditional song by giving it an imbube touch. The cover version was released last week by the well-travelled seven-member group which is based in South Africa. The group’s lead singer, Future Moyo said the remade song is meant to create unity among societies amid the ravaging pandemic. “We chose Kubukalanga, an old traditional folk song because of its message as well as its popularity among different tribes in Zimbabwe and beyond. “This song gives hope, especially during these difficult times of Covid-19 as it talks about people coming together, holding hands and celebrating victory. We rearranged it in mbube style and enriched it with more Kalanga tone/tunes,” said Moyo. Part of the song’s lyrics are: “Banhu be buKalanga, bhatanani maboko hango yedu ya bhuda muhhalima,” which translates to, people of BuKalanga, come together, we have conquered. The lyrics “Hango yedu yabhuda mu hhalima” speak about people getting freedom, which gives people hope as they battle the pandemic which continues to claim lives worldwide. “Basically, the song says ‘people, let’s come together and be one. Our country and our world has defeated the enemy. So let’s all rejoice.’ We did the song in a Kalanga language which makes Amavevane Acapella different from the rest as we chose to have our own style,” said Moyo. The song which has many cover versions also shows pride of being a BuKalanga native through lyrics: “KuBuKalanga ndiko kanyi kwedu . . . Tjozana zana tjonanayila tjondikumbudza kanyi, Tjozana zana tjonanayila tjondikumbudza kanyi,” a remembrance to ones roots. The release of this remade song followed that of a single titled Covid-19 which was released five months back. The group said they felt compelled to record the Covid-19 song to give people music that would heal them and at the same time, educate them on the deadly virus. Amavevane Acapella was founded in Bulawayo in 1996 as White Umfolosi. They left the country in 2007 and have been in South Africa ever since then. Over the years, they have become internationally acclaimed through their global tours. — @mthabisi_mthire.