The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube/Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Reporters
Rhumba musician, Ndux Junior has ventured into the retail business to try and raise funds to support his 12-member band which has been rendered jobless due to the ban of shows. The shop which opened last Saturday in his home area of Sigangatsha Business Centre in Maphisa District is Ndux Junior’s first shop. Named Malax Investment Properties, it specialises in groceries and hardware. Many rhumba musicians have been forced to supplement their earnings as sales in music have dipped mainly due to music piracy. Music shows have been most artistes’ mainstay, but with the advent of Covid-19, many have almost been rendered jobless due to the Covid-19 induced lockdown which is now in its fifth month. Now without shows, Ndux Junior’s band has been greatly affected. In an interview, the artiste narrated how he was forced to be innovative as he was not getting good returns from music to support his family and the band members. “Music alone is no longer providing enough for me and my band members. Depending on it completely is now a challenge. So, I had to work hard to build a retail and hardware shop under my name. “We opened the shop last Saturday with various activities and so far, I cannot complain,” he said. The Uthando Luyingozi hit-maker said he is eyeing to expand his retail business empire with the setting up of more shops in future. “I’m into this wholeheartedly. I’ve secured stands at Tjelanyemba and Sun yet sen where I’ll be constructing more retail shops. This will help my band members as I’m employing them to do various duties in my business venture,” he said. On whether he will be able to stand the heat in the competitive retail business in his area where most business are owned by injiva, Junior simply said: “Where there is competition, there is money.” The musician who also tried his hand in gold buying said Covid-19 affected that venture, forcing him to suspend it. However, Ndux Junior who is the son of late rhumba legend, Ndux Malax, assured his legion of fans that venturing into the retail business does not mean that they will be starved of his music. — @themkhust_ncube/@bonganikunzi