The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
FORMER Highlanders’ striker Prince Dube’s move to Azam in the Tanzanian topflight league is testament to the capacity Bosso have to generate revenue through player transfers if they make wise recruitments. In 2018, Highlanders engaged legend Madinda Ndlovu to help the club set up structures, which included drawing up a philosophy that would see the Bosso recruiting players from within its ranks. The idea was to promote juniors that the club would sell in due course. Besides producing their own products, Bosso had resolved to assemble a squad with an average age of 23 years, with those recruited from outside being exceptionally talented. However, as success continued to elude the Bulawayo giants, they seemed to have ditched the project they started in 2018 and hired old horses Mkhokheli Dube and ex-Kaizer Chiefs striker Mitchel Katsvairo. From the 2018 class, only midfielder Brian Banda and striker Tinashe Makanda, who have reportedly signed pre-contracts with champions FC Platinum, defensive midfielders Nqobizitha Masuku and Adrian Silla, defenders Peter Muduhwa and Andrew Mbeba, are the players Bosso were supposed to cash on. Dube’s move to Azam comes eight months after McClive Phiri made a move to Bidvest Wits in South Africa. Dalu Bhebhe, who facilitated Phiri’s deal with Wits said: “It is a great move, Azam need to be patient with him since there is inactivity in Zimbabwe. They are professionals, they did due diligence in arriving at the decision to sign him. I think Highlanders as a club need to sell at least four players per window to make the club financially viable. Assuming the average selling price is US$50 000, they could be making about US$200 000 per window, making the club financially viable.” Dube’s move should be a lesson to local clubs that they stand to bargain from players’ move if they tie them down on long-term contracts. Dube completed his move to Azam after successfully undergoing his medicals. The fringe Warriors and national Under-23 forward signed a two-year contract, with the Bulawayo soccer giants reportedly pocketing US$50 000 from the deal. Bosso are said to have added a sale-on clause that will see them getting 30 percent should Azam sell Dube. Before heading to Azam, Dube was said to have attracted interest from France and the move to East Africa will give the striker some game time and a chance to impress since the Zimbabwean league is on hold due to the Covid-19 lockdown. An experienced administrator hailed Bosso for agreeing to the Azam deal, noting that the club could have fetched more had Dube been on a long-term contract. “Highlanders have done good business because Prince could have gone for free had they decided to be hot-headed. Look, with our season on hold, it was going to be difficult for Bosso to get that US$50 000 and they would have lost Prince for free had they allowed his contract to lapse. But a lesson that all clubs must learn is that they must not allow contracts of players that still have age on their side to go into the final year before resuming negotiations. “Clubs must take a leaf from how European clubs conduct their business where they make sure they go to far lengths to extend a player’s contract because they know the value of their assets. Imagine if Prince had a year or two left in his contract; how much do you think he would have gone for,” said the administrator., who preferred anonymity. The administrator challenged Bosso to cultivate relations with Azam so that in future they become a club of choice should the Tanzanian side be on the hunt for players. Player manager Sanangurayi Mushove also hailed Dube’s move, adding that Zimbabweans at Azam, Bruce Kangwa and Never Tigere should help the striker settle in. “There are a lot of factors that have led to Zimbabweans migrating to different nations. Looking at Prince, he is an exceptional talent and with uncertainty as to when the league will resume, to me it’s a good move to Azam. The lockdown would have tempted Prince to be involved in money games and risk his career, but it seems his disciplined cousin (Mkhokheli Dube) did well to keep him under check,” said Mushove. “Prince is still young and growing in the game. Players like Teenage Hadebe, Marshal Munetsi and Tino Kadewere are some of the footballers that Prince can look up to and say, ‘yes, it’s possible to play in Europe’. Kangwa and Tigere have done well at Azam and should help Prince settle. “On the monetary side, one can never compare forex with the local currency, hence the move is good for both the club and the player. Obviously there are some who might say Highlanders got little for the value of Prince, but half a loaf is better than nothing, as the boy was going to walk away as a free agent at the end of the year since Zifa is yet to clarify the player status matters that have been affected by Covid-19.” A staunch Bosso supporter Lloyd Pasi Sibanda said: “I think it’s a good move for Dube. Look, our league is inactive and it’s been long since our Zimbabwean players last kicked a ball. Competitive games were last played in November 2019 and spending almost a season without kicking a ball may end up killing his form. “At his age, it’s good for him to be getting new challenges as football is also business these days. On the club side, we hope they sold him at a reasonable fee as he is one of the best in the local league. We hope the club made money too. Above all, we wish him the best.” — @ZililoR