The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
ZANU-PF Bulilima West legislator Cde Dingumuzi Phuti has hailed Zimbabweans based in the diaspora for their contribution towards infrastructure development in the constituency. Cde Phuti also thanked the local community, local business people, well wishers and rural district council personnel who have played a superintendent role in the facilitation of the developmental projects. Bulilima West Constituency has 13 wards with each of them embarking on infrastructure developmental programmes. The projects are namely completion of Nyele Community Centre, construction of Zompata Primary School, completion of a waiting mothers shelter at Tokwana Clinic and completion of Nlibgwane Pre School in Nyele Ward while in Masendu Ward projects underway are completion of Mazwaligwe Secondary School, completion of Mambo Clinic, construction of Luvuluma Clinic and refurbishment of Muke Primary School and at Ndolwane Ward there is the construction of Hungwa Primary School. In Makhulela Ward there is the construction of Gwamagwama Primary School and construction of a waiting Mothers shelter, while in Bambadzi Ward there is the construction of Mafa Primary School and completion of Mbimba clinic while at Madlambudzi Ward there is the refurbishment of Tsukuru Primary School, construction of Madlambudzi Clinic waiting mothers shelter. At Hingwe Ward projects underway include the construction of Hingwe Community Hall, completion of Himago Secondary School cottage while in Malanswazwi Ward there is the completion of Malalume Clinic whereas at Vulindlela Ward there is the construction of a Community Hall. In Dombodema Ward there is the construction of Dombodema Hall, refurbishment of Mnigau Primary School, refurbishment of Tjompani Primary School whereas at Dombolefu Ward there is the mooting of Nswazwi turn clinic. At Macingwana Ward there is the refurbishment of Macingwana Clinic while at Zimnyama Ward there is the construction of Zimnyama Clinic, refurbishment of Osabeni Pry and refurbishment of Nxele Primary School. Cde Phuti reiterated that the projects are a result of the unity between the local Government (RDCs), Zimbabweans based in the Diaspora and the local community. “South African based children of our land and those based in other countries among them UK, Canada and Botswana you name them have done tremendous work in terms of changing the complexion of our area when it comes to development. “I want to believe that we are among districts that are building many schools and clinics which goes to explain that the strategy has been tapped properly especially by the great cooperation that we get from our two national border rural councils namely Mangwe and Bulilima rural district councils. I must really say hats off for our two rural district councils and their CEOs, Bulilima’s John Brown Ncube and Mangwe’s Bongani Ngwenya. These projects are council projects as development and superintending authorities but we come in with all forms of support including mobilising communities to embrace development in that direction, participate and have ownership,” said Cde Phuti. Cde Phuti said the constituency is a true reflection of an intact community and embracing of Ubuntu where the Diasporans, local business people and community are not forsaking their roots but bringing about meaningful progress. “The Diasporans meet time and again to gather resources so as to inject funds for the projects. The rural district councils have also used the devolution funds and we call upon Government to continue supporting the RDCs. The local business people also assist wherever they can with the community being on ground to implement the projects,” he said. Cde Phuti said his role as a legislator is give Government directive thereby achieving President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s Vision 2030. “As an MP l play a role of have a mandate of great work of motivating and mobilising resources and l also use Constituency Development Fund (CDF) and I also source donations from friends and cooperates across and support our construction initiatives. “I also partner with them the Diasporans through social media and other ICT modes of communication to try and give them assurance that the thrusts of today’s development is based and supported by how much we put hands together to push ourselves and this ensures Zimbabwe becomes an upper to middle class economy by 2030 is achievable,” he said. Cde Phuti who is also the Deputy Minister of Information Communication Technologies, Postal and Courier services said his five year tenure which is on a two year period has seen the dream of a successful Zimbabwe being fulfilled as every community wakes up everyday to do something and the foreign based children of our land are giving them hope. — @mthabisi_mthire.