The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
VICTORIA Falls residents have implored the municipality to upgrade Chinotimba Stadium into a top multi-purpose sporting facility capable of attracting sports tourism to generate revenue for the resort town. Speaking during the council’s 2021 budget consultation meetings, residents said the town’s only stadium was in a sorry state and not suitable for the town’s status as a top world holiday resort. Victoria Falls is one of the world’s most preferred destinations, but has failed to attract world sporting events due to lack of infrastructure. Residents feel with proper facilities, the resort town could attract international clubs and become a prime sports tourism destination. “Victoria Falls is lagging behind in terms of infrastructure development yet it is the country’s tourism capital. We could be having a state-of-art stadium with all sporting disciplines. Our stadium is in a pathetic state. It’s like we are in Jambezi yet we are in one of the world’s most recognisable towns. We need a stadium that can attract tournaments and also prevent youths from abusing by taking part in sport,” said a resident. Some residents challenged the municipality to think outside the box and consider charging investors a development fee to be used for sprucing up sporting facilities. “Victoria Falls has for a long time been known as a place for making money, but with no development for locals. Council should charge investors a certain percentage and channel the money towards sports facilities. We want investors to also invest in sporting facilities so that we generate revenue,” said another resident. Responding to residents’ concerns, town treasurer Neville Ndlovu said the municipality is open to partnerships in investment. “We encourage partnerships and if you have funders bring them. The council will not bill residents for that because we will all have benefited,” Ndlovu said.
Chinotimba Stadium is home to Victoria Falls-based Zifa Southern Region Division One club Mosi Rovers. Three years ago, council claimed it had drawn up a masterplan, which included upgrading Chinotimba Stadium into a 10 000-seater multi-purpose facility and was looking for investors. Council wanted the stadium to have a football pitch, a triathlon track, discus, netball, volleyball, long and triple jump facilities. Zimbabwe Rugby Union also once approached council seeking to upgrade Chinotimba Stadium into a multi-discipline sport facility to host various activities. Government also has plans to turn Victoria Falls into its conference capital with state-of-the-art facilities ranging from five to seven star hotels, recreational, banking and sporting facilities, and has been courting investors. Some investors have expressed interest in constructing a motor racing course to bring the Grand Prix to Victoria Falls. Zimbabwe Cricket once harboured plans to build a 10 000-seater cricket stadium in Victoria Falls, which would have seen the country having a third Test ground to complement Queens Sports Club in Bulawayo and Harare Sports Club. ZC was allocated land off Pioneer Road between the railway line and Chinotimba Stadium and undertook to build a stadium in 2014 when a ground breaking ceremony was held. The project, however, has remained a pipe-dream due to financial constraints. A swimming pool is also lying idle despite partial renovation using United the United Nations World Tourism Organisation legacy funds. In August 2017, World Chess Federation president Kirsan Nikolayevich IIyumzhinov said Zimbabwe was likely to host the chess World Cup in 2021, showing that the resort town could become a sports destination of choice should infrastructure be rehabilitated or built . — @ncubeleon