The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya Beitbridge Bureau
Beitbridge district In Matabeleland South province has recorded remarkable transformation after the local authority for the area decided to allocate part of the $5,6 million it received from Government under devolution to the provision of more schools and clinics. In terms of schools, Beitbridge Rural District Council chief executive, Mr Peter Moyo said they had managed to establish a new primary school at Novhe, some 150km west of the town and repaired several others that were extensively damaged by climate change-related disasters. “We have completed the construction of two classroom blocks and a teachers’ house and an ablution block at Novhe Primary School (Ward 10), which is located some 18km north-west of Zezani Growth point and 12km north of Dendele,” said Mr Moyo. “The project has been on cards for a long time and we decided to use devolution funds to fill that gap. “In essence, we are glad that with enough devolution funds from the Government, we will be able to improve on issues of service delivery as a local authority.” Mr Moyo said Novhe Primary School would enrol learners from Early Childhood Development (ECD) up to Grade Three once the necessary registration processes are complete. He said the school would start as a satellite for either Vhuttulula or Dendele depending on which of the two schools will provide more pupils. Mr Moyo said they carried out repairs at Shashe primary and secondary schools in Beitbridge West (Ward 8) whose rooftops were blown off by strong winds last rainy season. On clinics, Mr Moyo said they had managed to construct Tshabili and Dumba clinic in Beitbridge East Constituency and also rehabilitated Shashe Clinic in Beitbridge West. He said they were looking forward to the opening Tshabili Clinic in Ward 2 soon following its inspection by the Ministry of Health and Child Care. “The clinic will relieve pressure on communities where people were travelling for more than 20 km to access the nearest facilities. “We have also put in piped water at Tshabili Primary school and installed another four storage tanks to supply communities with potable water.” Mr Moyo said Dumba clinic in Ward 15 will open its doors to the public before the end of this year. He said they were working on constructing more clinics and schools in areas where there are gaps. Mr Moyo said their focus was on minimising the distances that people walk to access basic facilities in line with globally acceptable standards. At the moment there are 17 clinics, 16 secondary and 70 primary schools in Beitbridge district.