The Chronicle Midlands Bureau Chief
THE Zimbabwe National Water Authority (Zinwa) has unveiled plans to introduce an instant billing system aimed at cutting costs, enhancing client convenience and improving revenue collection. After successfully piloting the technology in Glendale, Zinwa will now roll it out to the rest of its 534 water supply stations around the country. In the past staff would take meter readings manually, compile returns, send them for processing before bills are printed and returned to stations for distribution. In a statement yesterday, Mrs Marjorie Munyonga, Zinwa corporate communications and marketing manager, said instant billing allows for clients to get their bills on the spot the moment a meter reading is taken. She said Zinwa meter readers will now move around with network enabled gadgets that will allow them to make printouts of clients’ bills as they take meter readings. “Zinwa is set to introduce instant billing, in a development that is meant to bring more convenience to its clients. “After successfully piloting the technology in Glendale, one of the centres it provides service, Zinwa will now roll out the concept to the rest of its 534 water supply stations around the country,” said Mrs Munyonga. She said the devices will also make it possible for clients to make electronic payments and enquire on their arrears during the meter reading exercise. The introduction of instant billing, Mrs Munyonga said is part of the ongoing endeavours by Zinwa to bring more convenience and enhanced customer experience. “It will go a long way in reducing the current billing cycle, ensuring that each client gets his or her bills on time and eliminating cases where some clients have been complaining about not receiving their bills over prolonged periods,” she said. Mrs Munyonga said instant billing will also mean that staff members will now simultaneously read meters and deliver bills, which will save time and resources. “Both human and material resources saved through the introduction of instant billing will now be directed towards improving service delivery,” she said. “In the past staff would take meter readings manually, compile returns, send them for processing before bills are then printed and returned to stations for distribution.”