The Chronicle A NEW cancer of denigrating their own country and leadership has afflicted some local Zimbabweans and others domiciled in foreign lands. It is unfortunate that these few individuals are now spending more hours on social media denigrating their own country and leadership instead of using the time productively. They are abusing social media to create a non-existing crisis in the country and some concerned Zimbabweans in the diaspora are now panicking believing the country is on fire. What is disturbing is that some Government officials from neighbouring countries now believe there is indeed a crisis in Zimbabwe when the truth on the ground is that the situation has greatly improved since the coming in of the Second Republic. Social media can be used productively to disseminate information and the nation can constructively engage through the same media. Zimbabweans should expend more energy producing goods and services while at the same time proffering solutions to challenges facing the country as opposed to abusing the social media to divide the nation. The thrust now should be on turning around the economy and avoid being detracted by agents of regime change who are abusing the social media to incite people to engage in violent demonstrations. Similar demonstrations have in the past left a trail of destruction and the worst affected are ordinary citizens. The opposition political parties and other agents of regime change seem to have run out of ideas hence are now resorting to abusing social media to peddle falsehoods of a crisis in the country yet the reality is that everything is very normal and people are going about their business. Zimbabwe, like the rest of the world, has been forced to scale down economic activities as it battles to curb the spread of Covid-19. The glaring and unjustified attacks by the country’s detractors demand that as Zimbabweans we close ranks and resist the enemies’ machinations. We have just one Zimbabwe and it has to be made abundantly clear that it is us and us only that can make the Zimbabwe we want. Those allocated land should leave the comfort of towns and cities to work on the land so that the country can regain its status of being the breadbasket of southern Africa. The recent country tour of investment projects by President Mnangagwa confirmed that despite the spirited attempts by the country’s detractors to tarnish the country’s image, Zimbabwe remains an investment destination of choice for both foreign and local investors. We want at this juncture to commend Zimbabweans for remaining steadfast in their refusal to be used by a few rogue elements that are anti-Zimbabwe and relish the people’s suffering. Zimbabwe is not a doomed or failed State as the opposition parties and agents of regime change want us to believe. It is therefore, incumbent upon each and every Zimbabwean to act responsibly and refuse to be used by the country’s detractors to disturb peace, a prerequisite for economic development.