The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIFA Southern Region has started disbursing its $1,6 million Covid-19 relief fund, with each Division One club getting $60 000. The Southern Region has 18 Division One teams, meaning $1 080 000 was channelled to clubs, with $520 000 being retained for administrative purposes. The fund was given to the Southern Region about two weeks ago and is part of the US$1,8 million football rescue package from Fifa and Caf to assist clubs survive the adverse effects of the Covid-19 pandemic. Zifa Southern Region chairman Andrew Tapela said his committee resolved that all clubs that paid affiliation fees in full get $60 000. “We received the funds and the executive met to decide on a fair distribution of the money to the constituency. The relief is for members of the region, in this case clubs that are paid up. Those that had paid part of the affiliation fee, had the remainder of that affiliation fee deducted from the relief fund. It was agreed that we will not pay those who didn’t pay any affiliation and they will only get the relief fund if they activate their membership by affiliating,” said Tapela. Zifa Southern Region hiked its affiliation fees from $2 000 to $25 000 for clubs that were in the league last year. Newly promoted clubs were required to fork out $30 000 compared to $2 500 in 2019. The Southern Region boss said deposits were being made into club’s bank accounts. “We know some clubs are individually bankrolled, but the money is for clubs and as such we demanded club accounts so that funds are deposited into their coffers. Some are still sorting their club accounts,” he said. The Premier Soccer League got the biggest chunk ($25,7 million, about US$390 197) of the total relief fund. Each of the 18 topflight clubs will get an equivalent of about US$5 000, with the bulk of the money going towards Covid-19 tests for players and support staff. Meanwhile, some teams’ officials said the money came at an opportune time. Ajax Hotspurs director Siphambaniso Dube said: “The Covid-19 relief fund reflected in our account last Friday and the Southern Region quickly deducted their affiliation and player registration balances meaning clubs are clean now. It’s indeed a great relief financially and we hope that also filters down to the province. These are hard times and junior clubs and junior referees as well as junior coaches need to be catered for.” An Indlovu Iyanyathela official Blessing Mbwanda said while they appreciate the relief funds, they had hoped Zifa would pay them in forex or at least keep the money and pay them when needed at the prevailing interbank rate. “To us, in terms of salaries we are catered for and the relief funds we would have loved to use them to get equipment. But now that we are getting it now at a time when rates have changed three or so times, it might not really help much,” said Mbwanda.