The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
THE Covid-19 scourge is worsening each day through increased number of cases locally and to fight its spread, President Mnangagwa recently tightened the lockdown measures. The measures have come as another headache for the arts sector which had somewhat found ways of adjusting to the new way of life by staging live virtual shows in the evenings to entertain their multitudes of fans. But with a dawn to dusk curfew now imposed, this is going to prove difficult for the staging of most shows which have been organised by various promoters, as artistes will no longer be able to leave their respective homes to go to the shows’ venues. Since March, artistes and arts promoters have had their lives drastically change as they have not been able to stage physical shows like they used to, due to the pandemic. This has greatly affected them as they have lost their source of income. The virtual shows that were wholly sponsored by the respective organisers, among them FMG, Credisi, Gara Mumba Iwe and Nash TV live, had become an outlet for some artistes as they were getting paid for their appearances. Other than getting paid, the virtual shows were also exposing up-and-coming artistes, to wider audiences thereby boosting their careers. Chronicle Showbiz recently interacted with various arts practitioners to find out how they are going to execute their roles moving forward as the pandemic seems to be here to stay. Savanna Trust director, Daniel Maposa said it is becoming more and more important for artistes to explore other ways of monetising their craft outside of physical performances. “The lockdowns are having a serious beating on artistes, not only in Zimbabwe, but the rest of Africa. Realising that the lockdowns are extended, it is important for artistes to begin to explore other ways of monetising their work outside of the physical performances. “We need to begin to look at radio and virtual platforms and how they can be useful in generating revenue until lockdowns are lifted. This crisis should urge us to always be futuristic and diversify our skills so that we are not found wanting with all eggs in one basket,” said Maposa. Intwasa Arts Festival koBulawayo director Raisedon Baya said artistes must continue making use of digital platforms, but in the process, find ways of monetising their content so that they also benefit. “I believe those that are able to create safely should continue to create and find ways of getting their content out there to the consumers. So far, the best way to get to the consumers is via digital platforms so artistes need to think deep about that avenue, not just about putting content out there, but also monetising the platforms,” said Baya. National Arts Merit Awards managing director, Napoleon “Napster” Nyanhi who during the early days of the lockdown said that online shows are the next big thing, said artistes should open wide their eyes and not let opportunities pass by. “Artistes should realise that the world has changed and shifted. They should stop feeling sorry for themselves and start thinking. They must create for themselves, new ways of distributing their art without direct contact with people. The internet is an obvious route, but locally, there is a lot more we can do. “To be successful, they must compete on innovation. We are now in a season where the artistes that make it may not necessarily be the most talented, but the most inventive,” said Napster. For music promoters, the ban of public gatherings has just changed everything from bad to worse. Terminator Makoni of DTL Records which promoted several shows in Bulawayo last year and early this year said they are keeping their fingers crossed that the summer season will see the pandemic being curbed. “To be frank, this lockdown hasn’t been too good to anyone and one prays that God will soon intervene. As a promoter, I’m constantly in touch with most of the artistes, some whom we’re planning to have big shows with after this harsh lockdown,” said Makoni. Mduduzi Mdlongwa of 3D Events said their focus is now on penetrating the virtual space. He said they have crafted proposals with the hope to get support so that they host an online show. Dee Nosh, another music promoter who is part of 2 Kings Entertainment and DTL said fortunately his companies had a fruitful festive season and managed to stage shows at the beginning of the year. “Entertainment is on hold just like any business. We’ve not had events since March. As 2 Kings Entertainment, we’ve had no income coming through just like other promoters. But, 2019 was very fruitful for us during the festive period and we were active in January, February and half of March so we thank God for the savings we obtained. “We are hoping for the best and we’ll pick up the pace once it (lockdown/pandemic) has ended. Through Government’s Covid-19 relief funds, we’ll also manage to give our staff money to survive and stay safe while at home,” said Dee Nosh. The new breed of music promoters who have been hosting virtual shows said they have been forced to suspend those shows due to the new lockdown measures. Fusion Media Group founder Tatenda Mkandla who has been instrumental in promoting talent from Bulawayo during the lockdown by staging virtual shows weekly said they will no longer be hosting the shows as they are now focusing on marketing the ones they held to try and get funding. Another event that has also been promoting the city’s talent, Credisi that is organised by Iyasa director Nkululeko Dube has also been affected by the new lockdown measures. Dube however said they are determined to continue with the shows so they will find a way to go about it. “The lockdown definitely has affected our planning, especially in terms of movements and timing of the shows. We need to adjust a lot to ensure we can continue. “We’re determined to continue with our plans and we’ll ensure that we work around it in line with lockdown regulations. Where there is a will, there is a way,” said Dube. In Harare, Nash TV has been on top of the situation, giving artistes a platform to continue performing through their virtual shows. Not only have they given artistes from Harare a chance, but even those from Bulawayo. Butterphly Phunk who is behind these shows said the dusk to dawn curfew would not affect the staging of their event. “In this business, you have to be a creative and adapt easily. The curfew being there should not stop us from entertaining people as we should find ways of entertaining people lawfully. “We plan on having a show in August and we are going to maintain our 9.30pm showing time in a pre-recorded setup,” said Butterphly Phunk. For artistes, the next step is innovation. Mzoe 7 as well Kwekwe-based gospel musician Minister Lindani said they would continue utilising digital platforms for the advancement of their careers during this time. Minister Lindani who was innovative by bidding her latest single, Touya Ishe online said: “I’ll continue promoting my artistic work online as that’s the norm these days for every artiste to keep afloat. I’ll also appeal to Government through our arts ministry to see to it that artistes are not forgotten in terms of financial assistance and airplay on TV and radio stations. “It is not easy especially in our industry which is strained. Online events only keep my work on the map, but that has no financial benefit as was the case with physical shows.” Poet King KG as well as fine artist Bongiwe Ndlovu said they will continue using this time to polish their works. – @mthabisi_mthire.