The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
THE Zimbabwe National Army (ZNA) yesterday handed over a classroom block to Mpopoma High School constructed through the civil-military partnership. The school provided the building materials while the army constructed the classrooms. The block is expected to ease infrastructural challenges faced by the school that has an enrolment of more than 2 000 pupils. The high-rise building is among the first of such buildings to be constructed as Government shifts from the traditional style of constructing schools in view of land shortages. The block was built at a cost of more than ZW$5 million with the military supplying free labour which could have cost the school an additional $1 million. The block will be used by Advanced Level pupils. ZNA One Infantry Brigade Commander Brigadier-General Josephat Kudumba handed over the building at an event where he was represented by his deputy Colonel Maxwell Masuku. Speaking during the handover ceremony at the school, Brig-Gen Kudumba said the army provided the labour after the school engaged it. “We understand the central role that education plays in the national security matrix. The ZNA then mobilised army engineers, artisans, from One Infantry Brigade engineering regiment to construct the block and the construction started on 23 May 2017. One Infantry Brigade services communities in Matabeleland region and its major vehicle for undertaking construction projects is One Engineers squadron which has qualified engineers in various fields,” said Brig-Gen Kudumba. He said the Zimbabwe Defence Forces (ZDF) has a constitutional obligation to defend the country’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and various national interests and partaking in such projects is part of their civil-military engagements. “This role is undertaken by the army to support Government ministries and other Government institutions to maintain essential services in times of disasters or it could be any support that the communities can request from the military,” he said. Brig-Gen Kudumba said One Infantry Brigade is undertaking several construction projects in Bulawayo and Matabeleland region including the rehabilitation of the Hillside Teachers’ College dormitory which was burnt down last year. Bulawayo Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Judith Ncube commended the army for responding to community needs. “This handover could not have been carried out at a more appropriate time than this week when we celebrate the Defence Forces week. The ZDF brought their skilled professionals resulting in the construction of this magnificent structure. Labour was provided fully as part of their community outreach response. Which nation wouldn’t be proud of such a defence force? I’m honestly humbled by this gesture,” said Minister Ncube. Bulawayo Provincial Education Director Mrs Olicah Khaira said the block was constructed after parents with children at Mpopoma High School mooted the idea. She said improved schools’ infrastructure impacts positively to the quality of education. “At one stage of construction this structure became a national priority project of the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education and it was listed on the Presidential dashboard under the 100-day cycle. This then called for weekly updates to head office,” she said. — @nqotshili.