The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Sports Journalists Association Southern Region (SpojaSR) is mulling launching a Wellington Toni Award for outstanding young journalists as a way of honouring the legacy of the former Chronicle Deputy Sports Editor. Toni, who also worked as Sunday News and Newsday Sports Editor, died at a Harare Hospital on Thursday night after a long illness. He was 44. SpojaSR chairman Muziwethu Hadebe informed mourners about their plans at an emotionally charged funeral service for the late scribe at the family home in Emakhandeni suburb, Bulawayo yesterday. “I can see that senior sports journalists are here, the likes of Limukani Ncube, Lovemore Dube and Thandazani Zimbwa. As journalists we’re a struggling lot in life, but I realise that there are upcoming young journalists among us and for us to encourage them to carry on with the great work that was being done and to let Toni’s legacy live on, I shall try to use my influence as chairman of Spoja Southern Region to make sure that I push for an award for these upcoming journalists who would have done well in sports coverage and call that award the Wellington Toni Award. “To me and my colleagues, in as far as sports journalism is concerned, Toni is a hero. We have seen politicians celebrating their heroes, but as journalists I feel we have failed to celebrate our own heroes or heroines. In line with trying to celebrate the life of Wellington Toni, his contribution, not just to football, but to sport, I feel it would be ideal to create this award, regardless of whether it will have a financial value or not. That sentimental value will be priceless. This is my promise to my colleagues in the industry and the family, Toni’s legacy must and will live on,” said Hadebe. The service was attended by members of the media, mainly from Zimpapers where Toni began his journalism career in 2001. Sunday News Editor Ncube spoke on behalf of the biggest media stable in the country and described Toni as a hard working and highly ethical journalist who gave serious attention to detail to his work. “He was a rare breed of journalist and I feel proud to having worked with him,” said Ncube. Former Chronicle Sports Editor Dube said Toni was not only a principled scribe, but was also someone who also covered a wide range of sports, including grassroots sports, unlike some journalists who specialised in football coverage. Zifa communications manager Xolisani Gwesela said Toni’s articles always gave them something to think about. Ngezi Platinum goalkeepers coach Cosmas Zulu, a man who never ceases to turn funeral services into moments of laughter, also described Toni as a man of truth whose articles helped shape Zimbabwean football.