The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
SOME development partners have started constructing schools in Matabeleland North to complement Government efforts to make education accessible to all citizens. World Vision, which has built schools in Lupane, Hwange and Nkayi districts, is constructing two classrooms blocks at Mahlalufikile and Makhulubuse primary schools in Menyezwa area under Kusile Rural District Council. Plan International is also building a classrooms block each at Mtshina Primary and Secondary School in Tsholotsho district. Government needs more than 2 000 additional schools countrywide and has invited partners to assist. In some of the communities children walk for 20km to the nearest school and some satellite schools established to address the problem have pole and dagga classrooms. In some cases pupils from satellite schools writing public examinations walk for about 15km to examination centres which are the parent schools. Matabeleland North Provincial Education Director Mr Jabulani Mpofu said Binga and Bubi are the worst affected by the shortage of schools in the province. “We have a shortage of schools which has forced us to establish satellite schools. In Tsholotsho Plan International is building blocks at Mtshina Primary and Secondary school,” he said. World Vision set aside US$60 000 to build a classrooms block each at Mahlalufikile and Makhulubuse primary schools to replace the existing pole and dagga classrooms. World Vision co-ordinator for Lupane Mrs Sibongumusawenkosi Ncube said construction started in May and is expected to be completed next month. “World Vision is a child focused organisation whose vision is to ensure life in all its fullness. We are trying to fulfil this vision by involving, engaging and working with various stakeholders including our communities and children. “In Menyezwa, World Vision is building two classroom blocks at Makhulubuse and Mahlalufikile. These are schools that are mainly using pole and dagga classrooms,” said Mrs Ncube. She said the projects are in partnership with the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education, Kusile Rural District Council, District Development Co-ordinator’s office and members of the community who are providing labour and locally available resources. In Lupane other schools being renovated or expanded include Simunyu, Sichongo, Regina Mundi, St Paul’s Amandlethu and Mqabuko primary schools as well as AMR, Ngubo, Thokozani, Ndamuleni and Tiki Secondary schools. In Victoria Falls, the municipality is also scouting for partners to build a secondary school. — @ncubeleon