The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
A total of 2 899 applications were received by the Ministry of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation for the Government’s $10 million Covid-19 Arts Relief Fund with the disbursement of funds set to commence soon in the order of what was received first. Matabeleland North recorded the highest number of applicants (681) followed by Harare (486) and Midlands (469). Matabeleland South had the least number of applicants (93). The Arts Relief Fund was launched by the Government on July 10 to provide relief to registered arts associations/organisations/groups/production houses (Theatre, Dance, Film, Music Studios) and individual artistes demonstrating the effect of Covid-19 on their practice. These included registered arts centres/spaces/hubs or galleries and arts and culture education institutions projects and programmes. In a statement, the Ministry of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation said as of July 31, the deadline for applications, a total of 2 899 applications were received for the Covid-19 Arts Relief Fund. The statement said the ministry and its agencies were in the process of concluding who will receive the relief. “The ministry and its agencies (National Arts Council of Zimbabwe and the National Gallery of Zimbabwe) are now in the final stages of concluding the processes which entailed receiving and documenting applications, convening Provincial Selection Committee meetings and compiling lists of those applications recommended for approval to start receiving the relief funds and those not recommended so that we understand the reasons for rejection and craft intervention measures where necessary,” read part of the statement. “The processing of applications was all done at provincial level and the ministry is now activating the actual disbursements of the $10 million Arts Relief Fund to intended beneficiaries who should start receiving the money in their preferred accounts.” The statement went on to say that the selection process was also looking at inclusion of all demographics in the arts sector. “As stakeholders might be aware, this has been a hectic process, more so in the midst of the Covid-19 National Lockdown measures. “The ministry worked flat out and has ensured that the selection process is strictly adhered to with observance of gender balance, the inclusion of people living with disability and that the funds benefit only the deserving recipients.” In conclusion, the ministry thanked everyone who was involved in the process for their patience. “In this regard, the ministry would like to commend the Provincial Selection Committees, the applicants and the generality of our stakeholders for your patience during the said processes. Please be advised that disbursement of the funds will begin shortly in the order of what was received first no matter the quantity and the ministry will continue reviewing applications.”