The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
IN a rather embarrassing gaffe, Caf president Ahmad Ahmad addressed Harare businessman Philip Chiyangwa as Zifa president in his condolence message following the death of former Premier Soccer League chief executive officer Chris Sambo. Chiyangwa is a former Zifa president and heads the regional bloc Cosafa, while Felton Kamambo is the Zifa boss. Sambo succumbed to Covid-19 complications on Wednesday, according to family spokesperson Patience Musa, and died a few days after celebrating his 69th birthday. He was laid to rest in Harare on Thursday. After realising the embarrassing error, Caf immediately pulled down the condolence message issued on Saturday evening and posted a corrected version yesterday. “Dear President Chiyangwa I was deeply saddened to learn about the loss of Mr Chris Sambo, former chief executive officer of the Premier Soccer League (PSL). Mr Sambo as one of the dedicated persons in the football industry. I wish to convey, on my behalf and on that of the African Football Confederation, our heartfelt condolences to his family. In these mournful circumstances, we share with you our most sincere sympathies and support. Reiterating my deepest condolences, please accept, Mr President, the expression of my highest consideration and personal esteem,” read the original message from Ahmad, before being pulled down and replaced by one addressed to Kamambo. Yesterday, Chiyangwa, said he did not receive the letter from Ahmad before characteristically retorting that it was clear that the international football community recognised that he lost a stolen election in 2018. “I didn’t get the letter, (but) ain’t surprised. The election was stolen through bribery, this rings far and loud,” said Chiyangwa. Thirty-two Zifa councillors are under investigation by police on allegations of receiving bribe money ahead of the 2018 Zifa elections that ushered in Kamambo as the Zifa president after defeating Chiyangwa. Police sources recently told Chronicle Sport that investigations had been completed and the prosecution has since agreed to go ahead with the matter, as they believe they have a strong case to get convictions.