The Chronicle Dr Tatenda Simango I HOPE you are all in good health. Covid-19 is still with us but I feel the graph is starting to flatten thanks to the responsible sacrifice we have all taken during this lockdown, there is light at the end of the tunnel. This past week we had an increase of middle-aged patients coming for treatment for erectile dysfunction and I thought this will be a good discussion point. It is a delicate topic that can rock marriages and can even fuel domestic violence, infidelity and at times end up in divorce. We shall dissect this topic over two weeks so that we can help each other. Erectile dysfunction happens when a man has ongoing problems getting and keeping an erection. Without treatment, it can make sex difficult. One gets an erection when blood fills two chambers in the shaft of the penis known as the corpora cavernosa. This causes your penis to expand and stiffen, much like a balloon when filled with water. Impulses from the brain and genital nerves start the process. Anything that blocks these impulses or restricts blood flow to the penis can cause erectile dysfunction. Symptoms of erectile dysfunction include: Causes include: Long-distance bicycle riders can experience temporary impotence. Repeated pressure on the buttocks and genitals can affect the function of the nerves. Research suggests that avid bikers are more likely to get erectile dysfunction than other athletes. Some bicycle seats put pressure on the perineum, an area between the anus and scrotum full of arteries and nerves vital to sexual arousal. If you bike for many hours each week, get a seat designed to protect this area, The following are drugs that have been commonly found to affect sexual performance. If you are taking any of these it is important to discuss with your doctor on how best to manage the condition, do not just stop taking your medication: Neurological disorders associated with impotence include: When one has developed erectile dysfunction, investigations should be done to try and find the cause of the problem. This will include a detailed history of the symptoms and a stress test. Blood cell counts, blood sugar levels, cholesterol levels, and liver tests can reveal medical conditions that play a role in erectile dysfunction. The patient could also get checked for cardiovascular disease. Ultrasound scan of the groin can be helpful to rule out any changes in blood to the penis and scrotum. Prevention pointer that every man should start implementing from youth include: 