The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
VICTORIA Falls residents have an opportunity to take charge in the crafting of a pro-people budget as the municipality rolls out consultation meetings starting today until Friday. In the past few months, tempers were high in Victoria Falls as residents sought to influence a downward review of the approved 2020 budget. The municipality, which relies largely on ratepayers for revenue, crafted a $354 million budget for 2020 up from $22 million last year. Residents, largely criticised for snubbing meetings, later approached council complaining that the over 800 percent budget increase was too exorbitant for them as rates and water had become unbearable since January. The local authority resolved to maintain the budget and sought to come up with alternative sources of revenue, among them auctioning about 15 low density housing stands in forex. The council argued that reducing the budget would result in compromised service delivery as it will be forced to suspend some services such as refuse collection. The municipality is now starting consultations for the 2021 budget and is inviting residents to participate in the process. In a statement, the municipality management said while everyone is encouraged to attend, only 50 participants wearing face masks will be allowed in line with Covid-19 regulations. “Notice is hereby given that Victoria Falls Municipality will conduct the 2021 budget stakeholders meetings from 17 August to 21 August 2020. The public is therefore advised to take note of the dates and attend respectively as detailed. The meetings will conform to the Covid-19 regulations where the maximum number of 50 participants will be allowed on the first come first serve basis and sanitising and social distancing will be observed before and during the meeting,” read the statement. In an interview yesterday, Town Clerk Mr Ronnie Dube reiterated the importance of attending budget consultation meetings. “Consultations are a statutory requirement and as such I expect people to attend these consultations. I encourage all the stakeholders to attend in order to walk the budget process together to avert a situation where an agreed position is disputed. On the 2020 budget the process is finished as evidenced by the Ministerial approval of the same. “The call for the downward review is understood on the basis of a depressed national economy due to Covid-19 but it is unlikely to happen with this hyperinflation,” he said. — @ncubeleon