The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo
WELL, they do! If what I saw girls back in varsity doing is anything to go by, bathing, they definitely do! Girls would go into the bathroom with different soaps for the face and body, something to scrub the feet and the body and different kinds of intimate washes. I’d like to believe these girls have continued on the same trajectory and they’re the same Zimbabwean women socialite Pokello Nare was talking about recently. The Queen of Swagger told women in a grooming class that Zimbabwean women don’t bath and boy, has she angered plenty of girls out there! Pokello allegedly said she spent 45 minutes bathing and 30 minutes at the very least in the bathroom. Firstly, let’s face it, a 45-minute bath might be impossible to pull off in Bulawayo with its water challenges. There’s no way you’re going to bath for 45 minutes using a bucket! Secondly, before you catch feelings, have you ever evaluated your bath and personal grooming routine? I just think Pokello was quoted out of context. She probably meant there are many things involved if anyone is to look as good as she does. It doesn’t really matter whether you spend five or 45 minutes in the shower. What matters most is what you do once you step in there. Even more important is looking and smelling clean afterwards. Taking care of your skin is a good starting point. Drink plenty of water and avoid sugary and fatty foods. Moisturise your skin, paying close attention to your heels, elbows and knees. Have you ever seen women with dry, chapped skin peeping through their heels? They would’ve bathed, obviously, but paid little attention to moisturising their skin. I haven’t had a professional manicure in the past two years primarily because of my mummy duties, but did you know that keeping your nails trimmed is all you really need to look clean? Sometimes dirt builds up behind the nails and most don’t bother cleaning out. Some get artificial nails and don’t know when to call it time when some nails have broken and others have chipped nail polish. You would’ve bathed, but your fingers tell a different story. Some guy many years ago once told me that the first thing he looks at on a woman is her feet. They’ll tell you how clean she is, he said. If you have the time to pay attention to your feet, then you have the time to pay attention to other areas, was his theory. Again, all you need to do is scrub your feet, cut your nails or have them painted if you prefer; after removing all dirt and cuticles of course. Moisturise, moisturise, moisturise! I think petroleum jelly does the best at moisturising my feet, particularly during winter. You probably already know this, but I’ll tell you again. Shave all body hair that needs to be shaved! Your roll-on will not do its job if it’s applied on a bush of hair. Also, don’t puff your perfume onto your clothes, apply it directly onto your skin — each side of the neck, inside your wrists and elbows and behind your knees. Why? Because these are pressure points and perfume works best with body chemistry. Never underestimate the importance of cleaning behind your ears and running earbuds past the outer area of your ear. You can bath for as long as you want but wax peeping out of your ears will be a total throw over! Once you’ve dealt with personal grooming issues, the cherry on top is understanding the importance of style. Remember, being stylish doesn’t mean you have to buy expensive clothes, it simply means understanding what sort of clothes work with your body type. Fit is everything! I, for example, wouldn’t be caught dead wearing a crop top! Let’s just say I understand that a peplum top would probably look much better on me than a crop top would. There’s absolutely no need for you to be squeezing into clothes that don’t fit. Buy clothes your size, wash and iron them properly. If you miss underarms, collars, cuffs and hems, bathing for 45 minutes would be pointless because you wouldn’t look or smell entirely clean. Make-up is really not for everyone, but if you must wear some, make sure the foundation and powder match your complexion. When make-up is not done right, it does look like dirt! Until next week, flaunt your pattern and style and don’t forget to catch up with me on Twitter handle @PatternStyleZw or WhatsApp +263774492700.