The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Toundtainment Events, an events company that is based in Plumtree, through support from the business community, is promoting the town’s talent through a series of events online. A fortnight ago, a dancing competition was held and saw nine-year-old Khanyile Dube emerging tops and walking away with R500 courtesy of Chicken King. A singing competition followed and was won by South Africa-based musician Brian “BRK” Khupe who walked away with R500 from Chaipex Trucking. This past weekend, a DJs competition was held with the winner receiving R1 000 courtesy of Slentique Investments. Toundtainment founder, Handsome Sibanda said these competitions, which are all being conducted online, are being held as a way to motivate artistes, especially up-and-coming ones, to keep showcasing their talents during these trying times. “We started the competitions two weeks ago and we’ve held a dance, singing and DJs competition which were all sponsored by local businesspeople. Next week, hopefully we’ll do a poetry/public speaking competition and then lastly, a handcraft display. We’re in the process of sourcing for sponsorship and it’s looking promising. “These competitions are done online where we record short clips of people from Plumtree (both locally-based and outside) showcasing their talents then we post them on our Facebook page every Sunday at 6pm. People are then given two days to view them and vote with the one who gets the highest votes being adjudged the winner,” said Sibanda. He said the competitions were initiated to give the artistes a chance to grow and be known beyond their places of residence. “Plumtree has always been marginalised in terms of arts exposure hence why I felt compelled to find a way to showcase our town’s talent to the world via social media. “I created this platform so that these young artistes get exposure and also make some money when they win, seeing as Covid-19 has affected their income stream as events remain prohibited. I also hope that their talents will be identified by people with better resources and in better positions to groom them and grow their talents,” he said. Toundtainment Events was formed in 2002 by Sibanda and a fellow friend Busani Ndebele. It is currently being run with the assistance of Dumisani “DJ Yugoe” Magalane. Notable events the company has hosted in the border town include appearances by Lucy and Cosmo from Generations, Gp Ma Orange, the late Christopher “Gunmen” Khubeka and Madluphuthu. — @mthabisi_mthire.