The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
Most service vehicles belonging to Kwekwe City Council have been grounded as fresh fuel shortages have hit the country crippling service delivery in the mining town. The fuel situation has been worsened by fuel suppliers who are now demanding United States dollars. Speaking during a recent full council meeting, director of finance Mrs Rejoice Dandira said the local authority has been facing challenges with accessing fuel as most of the service stations were now demanding US dollars. Countrywide, most fuel suppliers have resorted to selling their fuel in US dollars making it difficult for some local authorities to purchase the commodity. Mrs Dandira, as a result, requested councillors to at least adopt the motion that the local authority should charge residents US dollars so that service delivery can go on. “Most of our vehicles especially those that use petrol, have been grounded due to lack of fuel supplies. Most of the fuel suppliers are now demanding US dollars yet we are still collecting payments in local currency. This is making it difficult for us to purchase the fuel,” she said. Government through Statutory Instrument 185 of 2020, gave a leeway for businesses and service providers to collect payments in either local currency or forex. Councillors led by deputy mayor Shadreck Tobaiwa said there was no need to debate the SI as it was self-explanatory hence the move should be adopted forthwith. “We cannot be found debating about an SI that came from Government. What we might discuss is the billing part where we need a special full council meeting so that we see how best we can bill our residents in both local and US dollars,” said Cllr Tobaiwa. Meanwhile, the local authority is still fighting to recover two ambulances that were impounded by the Zimbabwe Revenue Authority (ZIMRA). The ambulances donated to the local authority by then legislator Vongaiishe Mpereri were impounded by ZIMRA as part of investigations into Douglas Tapfuma’s tax evasion case. Tapfuma, former principal director of State residences, was jailed for four years in connection with abuse of office and tax evasion. Acting town clerk, Engineer John Mhike said the matter was now in provincial officers’ hands. “The issue has been taken up by provincial officials who are trying to push that we get back our fleet. We are yet to get feedback but we are hopeful that there will be a breakthrough,” said Eng Mhike. The local authority is operating with a single ambulance, a dire situation amid a continued surge in coronavirus cases countrywide.