The Chronicle Ivy Chiwaya
WHEN President Mnangagwa first announced the national lockdown to help slow the spread of Covid-19 in the country about five months ago, we didn’t realise the far-reaching implications of the measure. The first month of the lockdown was met with mixed feelings — anxiety, relief and prospects of an extended holiday — but that has since changed. Instead, we have been going through turbulent times. It is no longer pleasant staying at home. A number of financial challenges, which have resulted in food shortages and inconducive home environments have been the order of the day. Breadwinners have been experiencing various economic vulnerabilities and are starting to show signs of despair. Tempers are flaring in many homes on a daily basis because of the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic which has further traumatised school-going children. The truth of the matter is that the defenders of the homes now seem defenceless. Meanwhile, a significant number of male pupils have resorted to excessive drinking of illicit brews, as more and more shebeens continue to sprout across Bulawayo. Some have become “entrepreneurs” selling cigarettes, foodstuffs and doing menial jobs in order to help out their parents. Some schoolgirls have resorted to prostitution in order to secure the next meal in the home with some falling pregnant in the process. Unprotected adolescent sex has of late further widened the chances of contracting STIs, and HIV. It is worrying to note how some people still violate lockdown restrictions and find it hard to believe that Covid-19 is among us. They still meet in large groups, disregarding World Health Organisation recommendations to keep a social distance in order to prevent the spread of the coronavirus. On the academic front, a privileged few have been able to access online classes. Sadly, the majority of school-going children in rural areas can’t access online classes, which has gravely affected their learning. When the situation was normal, one could approach teachers for solutions at their cottages but this is now a thing of the past as teachers are not interfacing with pupils. The implementation of the syllabi has been a challenge as there is no communication with subject teachers, save for those who are communicating in groups via social media. However, it has become clear that this pandemic is still with us for a while to come. Pupils must be geared to live with it. In the event that schools reopen next year, social distancing and wearing of face masks consistently must be upheld especially by those at boarding schools. Classrooms, dormitories, dining halls and bathrooms must also be regularly disinfected. Pupils must also be discouraged from sharing stationery and teachers must be given adequate protective clothing. Many schools have large classes and crowded conditions, and before schools are opened, the Government is urged to spell out how the numbers will be managed to minimise the rate of transmission if there is an infection at any establishment. There are no secure water supplies at many schools, which would need to be fixed for the maintenance of clean sanitation facilities, including toilets, sinks and bathrooms. Reliable and safe transport, where social distancing can be implemented, would need to be organised and managed for the scores of pupils who normally travel to school in crowded mini buses. Beyond the safety of pupils and teaching staff, schools would need personal protective clothing for other workers, including cleaners and gardeners, clinical staff and those managing food and kitchens at boarding schools. Without conforming to the above, I see a reluctance by a majority of pupils and teachers to go back to school. Hopefully, the country will not experience what is happening in other states where lockdown restrictions have been eased, schools were opened and cases started to spiral out of control. Zimbabwe is still on partial lockdown where some industries and businesses are allowed to operate under rules requiring the provision of a safe working environment, face masks, social distancing and arrangements for the testing for Covid-19. Health experts expected a rise in Covid-19 cases during winter, highlighting that the more people had colds, the more they had a chance of infecting others but now that winter is over, one can only hope that there would be a decrease in new positive cases. The safe reopening of schools should not just be a responsibility for Government but teachers, parents, development partners and the rest of society. *Ivy Chiwaya is a Lower Six pupil at Empandeni High School in Matabeleland South Province