The Chronicle Tatenda Simango Coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2 that causes Covid-19, the disease, is not a Chinese virus. The world has been battling with the pandemic since December 2019. It’s a new virus that has created an economic meltdown. Alarmists have taken this opportunity to cause unrest and fear among the general populace through social media. In this article we will try and address some of these myths and discredit the untruths. Most of the videos circulating on social media are of people fighting for their lives. It is important to note that getting the Covid-19 virus is not a death sentence as 81 percent of the cases are mild infections, 13,8 percent report severe illness (shortness of breath requiring supplementary oxygen) and about 4,7 percent are critical. People of all ages can be infected. All races can be infected. However, older people and those with pre-existing medical conditions (such as asthma, diabetes and heart disease) appear to be more vulnerable to becoming severely ill. Children can catch Covid-19 but it seems less likely to develop into a severe disease. How the disease responds to temperature has raised a lot of myths. The current evidence shows that Covid-19 can be transmitted in all areas. It can be transmitted in areas with hot and humid climates. On the same note, cold weather and snow cannot kill Covid-19. Taking a hot bath does not prevent the virus, neither will trying to heat your body or exposing yourself to the sun make the virus inactive. Hand dryers are not effective in killing the Covid-19 either. Ultraviolet light cannot be used to sterilise hands and kill Covid-19. Interestingly, diet has been proposed to help people ward off this malady. There is no food or supplement that has been proven to prevent one from catching the virus. No food can cure Covid-19 in the unfortunate event of one contracting it. It is important to note that vitamin C helps to shorten the duration of the infection if one catches it, but it does not prevent one from getting infected. It supports the immune function of the body. Furthermore, no evidence supports the so-called ‘immune boosters’ like green tea and zinc as having a role in preventing Covid-19. Drinking water and staying hydrated is generally good medical advice, but drinking water every 15 minutes to flush out any virus that enters the mouth is not supported by any evidence. Garlic is a healthy food that may have some anti-microbial properties. However, there is no evidence that eating garlic has protected people from Covid-19. Gargling with bleach, acetic acid, steroids, essential oils, salt water, ethanol or other substances has no role in preventing nor treating the virus. Most of the substances mentioned previously are actually dangerous to the body. Avoiding cold foods like ice-cream will not help in avoiding the virus either. There is no vaccine for Covid-19. Vaccines against pneumonia and hemophilus influenza cannot provide protection against the new coronavirus. Antibiotics do not work against viruses; they may be given if there is bacterial co-infection. Much research is still being done – there are antiretrovirals (ARVs) under trial, Chloroquine and Hydroxychloroquine (anti-malarial medications), all show much promise. That the mask will protect you from Covid-19 is false. Tight fitting respirators (such as N95/N99) can protect health workers as they care for infected patients. For the general public without respiratory illness, wearing a lightweight disposable surgical mask is not recommended. This is because they don’t fit tightly, and therefore allow tiny droplets to get into the nose, mouth or eyes. However, people with respiratory illness can wear these masks to lessen their chance of infecting others. So, there is no need for one to hoard these masks. The thermal scanner is effective in detecting people who have developed a fever. However, they cannot detect people who are infected but are not yet sick with fever (as the incubation period of the virus is up to 14 days). If one has travelled from a ‘hot spot’ the responsible thing to do is to self-quarantine and update the relevant authorities at intervals of their progress during this time frame. Spraying alcohol chlorine all over your body will not kill viruses that have entered your body. Alcohol and chlorine can be useful to disinfect surfaces, but they need to be used under appropriate recommendations. Sixty percent or more alcohol is the effective concentration of alcohol to inactivate the virus. Covid-19 cannot be transmitted through mosquito bites; it is a respiratory infection which spreads primarily through droplets generated when an infected person coughs or sneezes or through droplets of saliva or mucus discharge from the nose. The virus was not deliberately created or released by people. Viruses can change over time. Occasionally, an animal such as a pig, bat or bird undergoes changes and passes on to humans. Pets have not been seen to transmit the infections to humans. Dogs and cats have tested positive for similar viruses. That online ordering or buying products shipped from China will make a person sick is false. The virus cannot exist for days or weeks on surfaces. What can I do to protect myself and reduce the risk of Covid-19 infection? This cannot be over emphasised. You can reduce your chances of being infected or spreading Covid-19 by taking these simple precautions: Avoid close contact with anyone with a cold or flu-like illness. Maintain at least one metre distance between yourself and anyone who is coughing or sneezing. Regularly and thoroughly cleaning your hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or washing them with soap and water. Practice good cough etiquette and good respiratory hygiene by covering your mouth and nose with your bent elbow or tissue when you cough or sneeze. Then dispose of the used tissue immediately. Avoid touching eyes, nose and mouth. This is because hands touch many surfaces and can pick up viruses. Once contaminated, hands can transfer the virus to your eyes, nose or mouth. From there, the virus can enter your body and make you sick. Avoid unnecessary travel to countries with confirmed Covid-19 cases. If you have a fever, cough and difficulty in breathing, seek medical attention early and call the health facility in advance. Depending on your history, this will allow your health care provider to quickly direct you to the right health facility. Additional information from the World Health Organisation. Tatenda Simango is a medical practitioner. He can be contacted via email watawu@gmail.com