The Chronicle Inter Milan striker Romelu Lukaku has revealed that Manchester United manager Ole Gunnar Solskjaer wanted him to remain at Old Trafford. The Belgium international joined Inter a few days before the start of the 2019/20 season as he pushed for a transfer from the Red Devils. In an interview on Youtube with Arsenal legend Ian Wright, Lukaku admits that he did not have the energy to stay with United. “One bad year can happen to everybody in their career. It was just done for me. You know what happened behind the scenes, it was just done. For me it was done,” he said as quoted by Sky Sports. “It was a difficult situation where for myself I had to make a decision where I have to go somewhere where I can learn other aspects of my game and work with somebody that wanted me as well. “Ole wanted me to stay, but I told him I was over. I didn’t have the energy. All credit to him because he’s been a man and he helped me make the move away.” The 26-year-old says that he harbours no hatred for any of the managers or clubs he played for in England and believes Solskjaer is doing things the right way to get United back to the top. “They’re going the right way because they’re bringing in the right players,” Lukaku said. “Ole is doing a good job and the results are going for them. I’m wishing them nothing but the best. “It’s a club that gave me a platform that I’ve never seen in my life, so for me to be disrespectful about Man U or any other club I played for in England I think is a bit childish. “I think I went past that stage of talking back to people.” Lukaku admitted that he could have easily joined Juventus instead of Inter Milan, but his heart was set in following his idols footsteps — Adriano and Ronaldo. “It was close. It was really close, but my mind was always set on Inter… and the manager,” Lukaku said. “When I was a kid, Inter was my team in Italy. I looked up to Adriano and Ronaldo. “Obviously when Inter came, the club, the manager Conte that wanted me at Chelsea and when he was at Juve as well, I was like now it’s time to go over there and see what it’s like, but just keep my head down and work.” — Sport24