The Chronicle With the South African shutdown already in effect, its production houses shooting some of the country’s biggest TV shows have come to a halt. This comes after President Cyril Ramaphosa on Monday announced a 21-day lockdown, restricting all citizens to their homes unless they are accessing or providing essential services. Muvhango and Skeem Saam are just some of the productions that have stopped shooting with the producers saying the safety and health of their crew and cast is their biggest priority. Rhythm City, Scandal! and Generations: The Legacy will also pause production with Imbewu: The Seed has also confirming to Sowetan that it will cease filming. e.tv managing director Marlon Davids said: “All production companies who work on our daily dramas/soaps will not be filming during the national lockdown. All daily dramas/soaps will continue [broadcasting] during the national lockdown.” However, Davids would not comment on whether the cast and crew of Imbewu, Scandal! and Rhythm City will be paid even though there will be no production. Generations: The Legacy spokesperson Nandipha Pantsi said: “We have enough material to stay on air. Cast and crew will be paid as per usual.” Mzansi Magic and 1Magic which broadcast other popular daily shows such as Isibaya, The River and The Queen told Sowetan that they were still in communication with various production houses over what will happen during the lockdown. “We’re in touch with all our production houses to consult with them on the impact of the lockdown on their individual productions. We will provide an update in due course,” Reggy Moalusi, MultiChoice SA executive head for corporate affairs said. Muvhango’s senior creative director Nthabiseng Tau told TshisaLIVE that the main filming of the show was halted just hours after the president’s address on Tuesday. “We closed yesterday so actors and crew are not on call as of when they wrapped yesterday.” Tau explained that there was a sombre mood on set, with the outbreak of Covid-19 on everyone’s mind. “We are taking the necessary precautions but when it comes to nature, we all don’t know or understand what’s going on.” She added that the soapie would still air on TV as they had footage for two months. Saam confirmed that all production staff would take part in the 21-day shutdown, but assured fans that the show would still air during the lockdown. “Following the statement by President Ramaphosa on March 23 regarding the escalation of measures to combat the Covid-19 pandemic, we will be partaking in the 21-day shutdown,” said publicist Sumaya Mogola. “The safety and health of our crew and cast is the biggest priority. For our fans though, the entertainment and drama will continue as per usual, the signature Skeem Saam way, so they don’t need to worry about their daily doses.” She could not comment on the potential long-term effects the lockdown may have on the production. As far as radio is concerned, SABC radio and Primedia Broadcasting — home of 947, KFM and 702 — said there will be no change to their line-ups. “Some presenters and producers will come into the office intermittently. However, the bulk of our presenters will broadcast from home,” said Kaya FM chief marketing officer Brenda Modibane. “We have adopted an internal policy limiting the number of people in studio and conducting interviews telephonically,” added head of human capital at Primedia Broadcasting Sibusisiwe Khumalo. SABC acting spokesperson Mmoni Seapolelo said: “The core business of broadcasting, particularly delivering on news and current affairs programmes as well as TV and radio programming will continue under stringent conditions, with alternative broadcast plans in place.” Meanwhile, Pay-TV MultiChoice will continue to pay hundreds of cast and crew members on their various productions during SA’s 21-day lockdown. Yesterday, MultiChoice committed to pay creatives on active shows such as Isibaya, The Queen, The River and more their full salaries during the period. The pay channel said it has set R80 million aside to make sure this happens. “MultiChoice has set aside R80 million to ensure that current productions are able to pay full salaries of cast, crew, and creatives for the months of March and April, by when hopefully we will have the worst of the disruptions behind us,” a statement from MultiChoice read. “The need to secure salaries of our creatives goes a long way in creating income stability for them and their families. We believe this to be critical for the industry and in our view simply the right thing to do.” – Sowetan/TimesLive.