The Chronicle Business Reporter PRESIDENT Mnangagwa has appointed industrialist and United Refineries Limited chief executive officer, Mr Busisa Moyo, as the new board chairperson for the Zimbabwe International Trade Fair (ZITF) Company with effect from March 13, 2020. He takes over from Ms Ruth Ncube whose term of office ended last December. Industry and Commerce Minister, Dr Sekai Nzenza, announced the appointment of Mr Moyo, in accordance with the Public Entities and Corporate Governance Act. “The Minister of Industry and Commerce, Honourable Dr Sekai Nzenza (MP) with the concurrence of His Excellency, the President E.D. Mnangagwa, is pleased to announce the appointment of Mr Busisa Moyo as the chairperson of the ZITF Company board in terms of Public Entities and Corporate Governance Act effective 13 March 2020,” said the minister in a statement. Mr Moyo is an accomplished business leader, industrialist, entrepreneur and nation-builder who has been recognised with various awards and accolades both within Zimbabwe and internationally. Apart from being the chief executive of United Refineries Limited, one of the giant agro-processing companies in the country based in Bulawayo, Mr Moyo is a member of the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe board. Dr Nzenza expressed confidence that Mr Moyo’s business acumen and experience would be key in re-positioning, modernising and transforming ZITF into a formidable regional and international player. She paid tribute to outgoing chairperson, Ms Ncube, for her leadership and dedicated contribution to ZITF Company’s strategic direction with competence and expertise. Mr Moyo, who is also a member of the Presidential Advisory Committee is a holder of a Bachelor of Accounting Science Degree with the University of South Africa and holds a Global Executive Masters in Business Administration from IESE Business School (Spain). Mr Moyo completed his Articles with Deloitte & Touche in 1999 and previously served as the chairman of the Oil Expressers Association of Zimbabwe, non-executive director of First Capital Bank and president of the Confederation of Zimbabwe Industries (CZI).