The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent TWO men have been arrested for allegedly breaking into a mine owner’s homestead in Gwanda, while armed with machetes and stole $22 000 and two gold weighing scales. Melinkosi Moyo (27) and Maxwell Banda (38) both from Gwanda were not asked to plead when they appeared Gwanda magistrate, Mrs Nomagugu Sibanda facing a robbery charge. They were remanded in custody to March 23. Prosecuting, Miss Glenda Nare said the pair who were in the company of an accomplice who is still at large robbed the complainant on February 6 at Banshee Mine Bar 20 in Gwanda. “On 6 February at around 2AM the accused persons and their accomplice who is still at large went to complainant’s home at Banshee Mine while armed with machetes and knocked on the door. The complainant refused to open and they opened the door and gained entry,” he said. “They threatened to assault the complainant and his wife with machetes and they demanded money. They took $22 000, two cell phones and two gold weighing scales and fled. The matter was reported to the police resulting in their arrest.” In another incident, a 19-year-old man has appeared in court for robbery, assault and malicious damage to property charges. Masiya Siziba from Nkwidze Village was convicted on his own plea of guilty to all charges by Gwanda magistrate, Mrs Nomagugu Sibanda. For the first count he was sentenced to 30 days imprisonment which was suspended on condition that he restitutes $150. For the second count he was sentenced to 15 months imprisonment of which six months were suspended on condition that he does not commit a similar within the next two years. Nine months were further suspended on condition that he performs 350 hours of community service at Gwanda Magistrates Court. For the third count he was sentenced to three months imprisonment which was suspended on condition that he does not commit a similar offence within the next two years. Prosecuting, Miss Faith Mutukwa said: “On 26 January at around 3AM the accused person who was in the company of three other people who are still at large went to Mr Wellington Mutema’s home in Gwanda where upon arrival Siziba demanded outstanding payment for a cellphone which had been bought by complainant’s friend.” She said Mr Mutema told them that his friend who had bought the phone was not around. “This pissed off Siziba and his accomplices who then started throwing stones at the complainant’s house and broke two window panes valued at $150,” said Miss Mutukwa. “On the same day at around 5AM Ms Sithandazile Msipha was walking from her place of residence to her next-door neighbor where she intended to charge her phone when she met Siziba and his accomplices. Siziba produced a knife and threatened Ms Msipha and ordered her to handover her cell phone. They took the phone and fled. The cell phone is valued at R700.” Ms Mutukwa said on the same day at around 3PM Siziba and his three accomplices approached Mr Peacemaker Muzadzisi and threatened to stab him with a knife after a misunderstanding. Mr Muzadzisi managed to disarm Siziba and he fled with his accomplices. @DubeMatutu