The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter HIGHLANDERS head coach Mark Harrison believes FC Platinum are better prepared and match fit for the Castle Challenge Cup clash in a fortnight’s time due to their participation in the Caf Champions League earlier in the year. Bosso are set to face FC Platinum in the pre- season cup tie at Barbourfields Stadium on March 14. The match is played between Castle Lager Premier Soccer League champions and winners of the Chibuku Super Cup. Bosso beat Black Rhinos 1-0 in a friendly match at Barbourfields Stadium on Sunday, but there was clear evidence of rustiness in their players’ performances. Harrison is, however, happy with his side’s pre-season preparations and believes they’ll be performing at 100 per cent after about seven games into the new season. He rated his players’ performances at between 70 and 75 percent after the Rhinos encounter. “Platinum are obviously a little bit further ahead than anybody else because they have been playing in Caf competitions and are already match fit and we have been playing friendlies. You can play 1 000 friendlies, but in the end, it’s only when you play competitive football that you feel the real thing,” said Harrison. Harrison has been with the squad for four weeks and he feels the players have responded superbly to his methods despite not being at optimum levels yet. Based on Sunday’s friendly, Bosso are likely to build around the veteran strikers Mkhokheli Dube and Mitchelle Katsvairo should they sign for the black and white striped army. The duo has been part of the pre-season squad from the first day and have so far proved that there is no substitute for experience through their work rate at training and in the friendly against Rhinos. They were joined by former Caps United goalkeeper Chris Mverechena, defender Collin Mujuru from Harare City and former Bulawayo City left-back Humphrey Ncube, as Harrison hinted that he will throw in veterans to guide youngsters that he plans to carefully blood into the first team. — @ innocentskizoe 