The Chronicle Walter Mswazie THE country has of late been disturbed by stories about coronavirus, an infectious pathogen which originated in China. Two people in the country were a few days ago isolated but both were later cleared after they tested negative to the virus that causes Covid-19.  South Africa this week confirmed a case, the first in Sadc. The case at Harare’s Wilkins Hospital specialised unit where a woman was detained literally sent shock waves all over the country with rumour mongers having a field day on social media. Social media enthusiasts could be excused for believing the posts, most of which were confidently saying that there were now cases of coronavirus in the country. This could however, be attributed to the media hype created by those who had seen the woman admitted and raised alarm to the media. While we, as the mainstream media, should be the first to tell the story, my conviction is that we rushed and caused people to panic, only to attempt to reduce the impact of the story by setting the record straight later. In Masvingo, 22 people were said to have been screened for the virus but little information has been shared about them.  I think more information should be shared about these people. Even more information must be shared with our people in rural areas on what they must do if they suspect infection besides rushing to the nearest health facility. By comparison, when someone is infected by cholera, our people know that they must give the patient a salt and sugar solution for rehydration before the person is taken to hospital. While the Government is working hard, together with the World Health Organisation and other development partners to sensitise the people on what they should do in case of a suspected coronavirus case, there is little knowledge being shared, especially in rural areas about a disease that has killed more than 3 000 people in China and other Asian countries. Over 79 000 cases have been reported world-wide with 107 deaths so far reported in Iran and more than 100 in Italy. The swift action by health personnel to attend to the two suspected cases is commendable and reports that the Ministry of Health and Child Care is ready to use available means once it is proven that the virus has “invaded” our country deserve praise.  We should always be proactive and the responsible ministry should not sleep on duty. It is a known fact that many Zimbabweans visit China with our relatives and children studying in that country, some in coronavirus-affected cities so we should keep tabs on the development of the epidemic. However, the approach should not raise panic among citizens. We all know that there is too much social media frenzy in the country but it is advised that social media enthusiasts be responsible as some messages would put people into panic mode.  Self-censorship is important so that we don’t stop people from enjoying life for fear of unproven contamination. Those in business are already counting their losses as some irresponsible people are discouraging others from buying stuff sold at flea-markets, alleging that the products come from China and are therefore infected with coronavirus. Tourists from China are no longer traveling and those who normally buy goods from that country cannot travel for fear of contracting the virus. Second hand clothes’ marketers are not spared either, as their wares are being snubbed over similar claims. While it is good and strategic to keep tabs on this new disease, it is equally good not to make everyone panic when we don’t have the disease in Zimbabwe yet. Epidemiology and Diseases Control director in the Ministry of Health and Child Care, Dr Portia Manangazira had a torrid time a few days ago explaining that the woman who had been detained in Harare after suspicions that she was infected with the virus tested negative. This was meant to allay fears of infection in the country and it worked, at least for those who can access the media. At the time of writing, many people were asking whether or not there were any coronavirus infections in Masvingo. This followed a report by a local newspaper which said 22 people were under surveillance after travelling outside the country.  These people have not been in China neither have they been in contact with Chinese or someone from that country.  Also, everyone is checked for the virus at every entry point into the country. Therefore, there is no need to put people into panic mode. @walterbmswazie2