The Chronicle Zvamaida Murwira, Harare Bureau Government remains committed in the investment of young people and has since independence taken various policy measures to ensure that they were able to carry the country’s legacy which is embedded in the liberation struggle, a Cabinet Minister has said. Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa said several policy measures have been implemented in various facets including provision of children’s rights in the Constitution as part of Government’s deliberate strategy to uplift the lives of young people. Minister Mutsvangwa said this in an interview to mark Zimbabwe’s commemoration of the International Children’s Day of Broadcasting, a global event celebrated yesterday. “We have invested a lot in children since independence and we have continued with that trajectory to date. “We have included children’s rights in the country’s Constitution and we have done this because we know they carry the legacy of our country. We will continue to do everything to make sure they are taken care of,” said Minister Mutsvangwa. She said Government had prioritised children in the area of education, health and has introduced several empowerment programmes aimed at ensuring that they were well taken of. “Since independence it has been   Government’s preoccupation to uplift the life of our young people. We want them to carry the legacy of the country which is obviously premised on the liberation struggle. As Government, we will continue to cherish the International Children’s Day of Broadcasting and join the rest of the world in commemorating it. We are celebrating the day in the context of our achievements as Government to uplift young people and we stand proud of our efforts.” Zimbabwe Youth Council head of corporate affairs and resource mobilisation, Mr Tanzikwa Guranungo implored the youths to remain vigilant and support the cause of the country’s revolution. “As ZYC we are excited in commemorating the day with our youths. The day will obviously make our young people appreciate  broadcasting. We would want to encourage them to be always positive about their country. We are now in a Second Republic where we are emphasising on re-engagement and we expect that the youths reflect on that when they broadcast. They should also support the cause of the country’s revolution,” said Mr Guranungo. As has become the norm, young people were given an opportunity to broadcast yesterday and most of them expressed excitement. “I am happy to be associated with the day. Getting an opportunity to be behind the microphone gave me a feeling of aspiring to be a broadcaster when I complete my studies,” said Sharon Manhando from Highfield. The International Children’s Day of Broadcasting was launched by UNICEF in 1991 in order to encourage broadcasters worldwide to create awareness of children’s issues. Children have been allowed to be part of the programming process, to talk about their hopes and dreams and share information with their peers. Television and radio play a vital role in raising awareness of global issues as well as shaping children’s lives.