The Chronicle Israelis are heading to polling stations to cast their ballots in their third general election in less than a year after the two largest parties failed to achieve a power-sharing government. Opinion polls in the lead-up to Saturday’s vote forecast a tight race between embattled Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who heads the right-wing Likud party and who is facing trial for corruption, and former army chief Benny Gantz, leader of the Blue and White alliance. Both will fall well short of a majority in Israel’s proportional system and the winner will seek to form a coalition with multiple smaller parties, raising the possibility of a fourth election in quick succession. Polls for 6.4 million eligible voters opened at 7am (05:00 GMT). Israelis have until 10pm (20:00 GMT) to cast their vote, at which point media outlets can publish the first exit polls and signal whether the deadlock was broken. Israeli citizens aged 18 and over, including those living in illegal settlements in occupied East Jerusalem and the West Bank are eligible to vote. The 4.8 million Palestinians living under Israeli military occupation in East Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza do not have voting rights. There was little fanfare in the days leading up to the vote, with a noticeable absence of campaign posters and public rallies on the streets. With voter fatigue clearly a factor after the inconclusive polls in September and April, turnout could prove to be decisive. Election day is a national holiday in Israel but the three-repeat vote and fears of the new coronavirus outbreak, which has so far has been kept largely in check, look to hinder turnout. Israel set up some 15 stations to allow voting by hundreds of Israelis who have been ordered to remain in home quarantine after possible exposure to the virus. Al Jazeera’s Imran Khan, reporting from West Jerusalem, said the months-long political deadlock had left the public frustrated. “They say that politicians needed to sort this out in the first election and not this one. However that anger hasn’t led to apathy. In fact, what we’re seeing is people coming out to vote, hoping that this one will be decisive,” Khan said. The Joint List, an alliance of four parties who mainly represent Palestinian citizens of Israel, is also urging people to take to the polls. According to opinion poll, the Joint List, headed by Ayman Odeh, is expected to win a record 14-15 of the Knesset’s 120 seats, improving its September showing when it won 13 seats.-Al Jazeera.