The Chronicle Munyaradzi Musiiwa, Midlands Correspondent POLICE in the Midlands province yesterday arrested more than 1 000 illegal artisanal miners as they intensify a crackdown on machete-wielding gangs under an operation code named Chikorokoza Ngachipere/No to machete gangs. Police raided Lulu and Wanderer Mines in Shurugwi and other illegal gold mines in Kwekwe where they arrested 1 061 illegal gold panners. Yesterday’s arrests bring to more than 9 000, the number of  illegal panners arrested countrywide since police descended on the violent machete-wielding gangs that had become a menace in the country. National Police Spokesperson Assistant Commissioner Paul Nyathi confirmed the arrests made in Kwekwe and Shurugwi districts which are the epicentres of illegal gold mining in the Midlands province. Asst Comm Nyathi said the ongoing operation is mainly targeting machete-wielding gangs that are behind a spate of robberies and other violent crimes. “I can confirm that we have so far arrested 1 061 artisanal miners in the Midlands province under operation Chikorokoza Ngachipere/No to machete gangs. This is an ongoing operation that is mainly targeting machete gangs. For the past two days we have raided Kwekwe and Shurugwi and we will not disclose where we are going to strike next. We busted Baka, Maketo and Anaconda who are notorious gangs from Mashonaland West. We want to protect our law-abiding citizens from these unruly elements who had become law unto themselves. We are restoring sanity in mining communities and maintaining peace in the country,” he said. Asst Comm Nyathi said the machete-wielding gangs are not just from Shurugwi district but are coming from different parts of the country. “What we have established from the arrests that we have made so far is that these machete gangs are not from Shurugwi alone as has been earlier alleged. They are from different parts of the country. People should not stereotype others. “The people that we have arrested so far are not from Shurugwi alone but from different parts of the country. We are leaving no stone unturned in this operation and there will be no sacred cows. At the moment we are vetting these suspects to see which ones were involved in criminal activities,” he said. Asst Comm Nyathi said Police will release an updated total number of arrests made so far under the operation today. Shurugwi North Legislator, Cde Robson Nyathi, concurred that the illegal gold miners and machete-wielding gangs who earned the moniker MaShurugwi were not all from Shurugwi. He however expressed concern over the arrests of women who were benefiting from an empowerment programme in Shurugwi whose activities were formalised. “We are happy that police are now restoring sanity in mining communities. However, there were some people who were arrested in Shurugwi who benefited from an empowerment initiative meant to create employment for youths and women. Some of the people that were caught in the crossfire are breastfeeding women. I do not think those were involved in criminal activities,” he said.