The Chronicle PRINCE Harry has been advised to step up his efforts to look after the elderly relatives he left behind in the UK after his grandmother the Queen was forced to self isolate in Windsor Castle amid coronavirus fears. Social media users have shared their concerns after the Queen delivered a heartfelt statement and expressed her concern for the current pandemic. And now worried Twitter users have advised Harry to come home from Canada and step up to assist the monarchy, even if it means being apart from his wife, Meghan Markle, and son Archie. The Queen’s statement said: “As Philip and I arrive at Windsor today, we know that many individuals and families across the United Kingdom, and around the world, are entering a period of great concern and uncertainty. “We are all being advised to change our normal routines and regular patterns of life for the greater good of the communities we live in and, in particular, to protect the most vulnerable within them. “At times such as these, I am reminded that our nation’s history has been forged by people and communities coming together to work as one, concentrating our combined efforts with a focus on the common goal.” Meghan and Harry then went on their Sussex Royal account to share the Queen’s message on the coronavirus pandemic. Instagram users were left bewildered about why they were sharing the post when they had announced their step back from the royal family and move thousands of miles away. One Instagram user replied to their post saying: “@sussexroyal I certainly hope you are checking in on your father who is in the highest risk group.” Meanwhile, Prince Harry and Meghan moved to Canada to protect Archie from the “negativity” in the UK, a source has claimed. The Duke (35) and Duchess of Sussex (38) who have officially stepped back as senior royals in a bid to become financially independent, moved from Windsor to Vancouver Island in January and currently live in a £10 million mansion. Speaking to US Weekly, a source claimed: “He wants to shield his son from the negativity and tension he would’ve been exposed to back in England.” A further source added that Prince Harry “knows what it’s like to grow up in the spotlight, and he wants to give Archie the most normal upbringing possible”. It comes as a close friend exclusively told DailyMail.com Meghan Markle and Prince Harry are self-isolating in Canada, and that Harry feels “helpless” and is “concerned” about the Queen and his father catching coronavirus.  — BBC