The Chronicle Munyaradzi Musiiwa WHILE Covid-19 is ravaging the world, particularly in developed countries, it has not affected Africa that much although cases are rising. It is regrettable that amid this public health challenge, some Zimbabweans are still making memes, humour and rumour on social media about it. For example, soon after Government announced that the country had recorded its first two Covid-19 cases, some Zimbabweans seized the opportunity to mock authorities over the US$ 50 billion grant offered to affected countries by the International Monitory Fund to combat the pandemic. The question is, do we really hate ourselves that much? Hopefully, those doctors-cum-political activists or those politicians masquerading as health practitioners will not pull another stunt and try to arm-twist Government to bow down to their demands with the help of treacherous opposing narratives. In the UK, retired doctors and nurses have come out of retirement to assist Government battle the virus. This shows strong patriotism. Instead of making fun of the situation, Zimbabweans should start bracing themselves for the pandemic as it is now right on our doorstep and ensure that the country, which is also facing economic challenges, does not get the worse of the pandemic. It is also time for politicians across the divide to desist from the culture of mudslinging, blame game and self-importance but unite and show true sincerity to the Zimbabwean citizenry and complement efforts in fighting the virus. South Africa’s cases had, by yesterday, risen to close to 400 in three weeks, an indicator that Zimbabwe can have more cases of the viral infection than the two that have been recorded considering that there are many Zimbabweans living in the neighbouring country and the traffic between the two countries. It is time for everyone to be as honest and as frank as possible on the infection in the country to enable citizens to prepare and protect themselves.  Let us not put lipstick on a frog and call it beautiful. Let us not tell lies and start believing them. Not this time. The British Government announced that it was having a torrid time mobilising resources for test kits while Italy which has one of the best healthcare systems in the world has been crippled by the pandemic and has recorded more than 5 000 deaths surpassing China where the virus was first identified.  This tells us how big the challenge can be and how important it is for every Zimbabwean to unite against this infection. There were pathetic videos that went viral on social media a few days ago showing some American nationals deliberately spreading the virus by licking trollies and smearing saliva on bus supporting poles.  We hope this mentality is not exported to Zimbabwe and people become responsible citizens. Retailers and fast food outlets in the country seem to have responded swiftly to the likely health hazard by placing hand sanitisers at their till points and entrances.  Consistent use of hand sanitisers can help in the fight against the disease. We hope we are mature enough to deal with this pandemic basing on how HIV and Aids was first perceived and how affected people were treated by the community. To that end, Government should launch a vigorous information dissemination programme, particularly in rural areas to ensure that people have accurate information about the pandemic to be able to stay safe. President Mnangagwa announced last week the suspension of public gatherings of more than 100 people.  Many churches did well at the weekend to uphold that order but others should not be found wanting by hiding under the worship banner and claim that it is ungodly to effect reasonable limits to church gatherings.  No, we are not being anti-Christ.  We are merely being proactive; the pandemic knows no religion, race, creed, gender nor any other demographic variation. On another note, Government and industry should ensure that basic commodities and necessities that usually attract crowds such as fuel and mealie meal are readily available to avoid crowding in supermarkets and at fuel stations. Government and local authorities should also ensure that pavements in the central business districts in towns and cities are clear, clean and not congested by illegal traders. Public places such as bars and night clubs should be closely monitored to ensure that they also do not contribute towards the spread of the virus. Breweries should limit stocks to slow down traffic to bars.