The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIFA Southern Region is mulling a transfer reprieve for its clubs, whose preparations for the 2020 season were affected by the suspension of all sporting activities due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The national association has chosen to stick to today’s player registration deadline despite the uncertainty of the start of the 2020 season, as the threat posed by coronavirus remains. Most clubs, especially in the lower divisions, were still trying to recruit players when President Emmerson Mnangagwa announced a raft of measures to help curb its spread in Zimbabwe. Among the measures is a total ban of all sporting activities, which indefinitely suspended the start of the 2020 season. There have been projections that the season could start around June, but with the virus spreading exponentially and deaths reaching the hundreds in individual countries in Europe and the United States, that could just be a tentative date. Zifa had been encouraging clubs in the Premier Soccer League and lower leagues to adhere to today’s player registration deadline. However, Zifa Southern Region are expected to extend the window to give clubs such as Zimbabwe Saints an opportunity to submit their squads. “We appreciate that there was a deadline set before the pandemic, but in my view, it will not do any harm to give teams a reprieve. Remember some clubs rely on getting players that would have failed to make the grade at PSL clubs and their plans were affected. A proper position on how long we are going to give our clubs the registration reprieve will be determined by the executive’s discussions. If you call tomorrow (today), we should be in a position to give you what we’ve settled on,” said Fiso Siziba, a Zifa Southern Region board member. Zimbabwe Saints have already initiated communication with Zifa Southern Region. Vincent Pamire, the Zimbabwe Saints chairman said: “We know our leaders are not rigid and trust that they will allow us to register beyond the deadline. Look, we had planned to hold trials after paying our affiliation fee and then boom, this epidemic blew up and everything stopped. We’ve had talks with the region and are waiting for feedback.” Zimbabwe Saints have been training some players under the guidance of veteran gaffer Gibson Homela and Lloyd Munhanga, and are also in the hunt for a head coach. Premiership clubs are unlikely to be affected by today’s deadline as they have been registering players since March 10. The topflight league had set March 10 as the administrative player registration that was meant to facilitate the process of player licences that will be delivered to clubs in time. Premiership clubs also managed to beef up their squads, with Highlanders making eight additions to their squad. Bosso signed veteran striker Mkhokheli Dube, former Kaizer Chiefs forward Mitchell Katsvairo, ex-Orlando Pirates starlet Rodi Sibanda, goalkeeper Chris Mverechena from Caps United, Aces Youth Academy product Collin Mujuru from Harare City and Humphrey Ncube from Bulawayo City. Defender Cardwell Gavaza and forward Muziwakhe Dhlamini were promoted from Highlanders’ development side Bosso 90 into the first team. Bulawayo City FC have registered former Young Warriors’ striker Mgcini Sibanda, defender Lewis Ncube, forward Bothwell Nyathi, the experienced trio of defender Kudzai Chideu, defensive midfielder Dominic Mukandi and attacking midfielder Hillary Bakacheza. Bulawayo Chiefs’ new signings include Joe Nyabinde and Ben Nyahunzvi, who were offloaded by PSL runners-up Chicken Inn, two Ghanaians, defender Michael Foli and winger Samuel Adomu, Corey-Eli Black, who joined from Bantu Leopards, and experienced striker Charles Sibanda, who was released by FC Platinum. Chicken Inn have brought on board 31-year-old right-back Ian Nekati, unheralded 23-year-old Brian Giant from Mosi Rovers in Victoria Falls and 29-year-old attacking midfielder Clive Dzingai from relegated Mushowani Stars. — @ZililoR.