The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Court Reporter PROMINENT Bulawayo businessman Ismail Moosa Lunat accused of fuelling the forex black market, money laundering and externalising more than US$2,2 million was yesterday released on $20 000 by the High Court after spending a month in remand prison. The ruling by Bulawayo Hight Court judge Justice Thompson Mabhikwa follows an application by Lunat, through his lawyer Mr Nqobani Sithole of Ncube Attorneys challenging the lower court’s decision to deny him bail. “It is ordered by consent that appellant (Lunat) be allowed to deposit $20 000 as monetary bail with the Registrar of the High Court. Appellant should continue to reside at his given residential address as well as report twice a week at Bulawayo Central Police Station on Mondays and Wednesdays until the matter is finalised,” ruled Justice Mabhikwa. He was also ordered to surrender all travel documents to the Registrar of the High Court. Lunat (57) of Kumalo suburb was recently arrested by officials from the Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission (ZACC). He was last month denied bail by Bulawayo magistrate Mr Tinashe Tashaya who argued that he wanted the public to have faith and trust in the justice delivery system. Lunat is facing money laundering charges and is set to appear in court on Friday for provision of a trial date. In papers before the court, the State was cited as a respondent. The State, which was represented by Mr Khumbulani Ndlovu, had initially opposed Lunat’s application citing fears of interfering with investigations. However, during the hearing, Mr Ndlovu later consented to the bail application. According to court papers, it was stated that at some point in December 2018, the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe raised a red flag over Lunat’s use of his company bank account to engage in illicit transactions. The court heard that the actual amount which was externalised amounts to US$2,2 million and not the $1,3 million that was initially presented by ZACC. The State alleged that Lunat is one of the businesspeople who have been under scrutiny by the central bank for allegedly fuelling the foreign currency black market, a move which has contributed to the spiraling of rates on the parallel market. -@mashnets