The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter PREMIER Soccer League (PSL) clubs with at least three players called up to the Warriors’ provisionalsquadforthe2020AfricanNations Championship (Chan) finals have no obligation to release them, as the competition falls outside Fifa calendar dates. Warriors’ coach Zdravko Logarušic named a 28-man provisional squad that will go into a 10-day training camp on Sunday to start preparations for Chan, which is restricted to players in their home countries’ national leagues. Cameron will host this year’s edition from April 4-25. The PSL yesterday reiterated that it will continue with its programme and will not entertain requests to postpone matches involving teams that supply more than two players to the national team. Clubs likely to be affected by the PSL’s stance include Highlanders, whose goalkeeper Ariel Sibanda, defender Peter Muduhwa and striker Prince Dube were called up. Chicken Inn, who won a four-team pre- season tournament at the weekend, and Ngezi PlatinumStarsprovidefiveplayerseach,while Dynamos have four players and champions FC Platinum had three called up. “We received communication from Zifa directing us as the Premier Soccer League that we shall not have games on Fifa weekends, be it that they are friendly matches or official matches. As such, we will not postpone our games for national team fixtures that are outside Fifa calendar dates, be it competitive or friendly. Given that, clubs don’t have an obligation to release players,” said PSL chief executive officer Kennedy Ndebele. PSL rules state that a team can only ask for a postponement if it has three or more players in the national team for Fifa sanctioned matches, but if they are called for games outside Fifa dates, it’s up to the club to release players or not. Zimbabwe will play the opening match of the tournament in Group A against Cameroon on April 4. Mali and Burkina Faso complete the group make up. Warriors provisional squad Goalkeepers: Simbarashe Chinani (Dynamos), Ariel Sibanda (Highlanders), Nelson Chadya (Ngezi Platinum Stars), Talbert Shumba (Triangle United) Defenders: Xolani Ndlovu, Liberty Chakoroma, Ian Nekati (all Chicken Inn), Qadr Amini, Frank Makarati (both Ngezi Platinum Stars), Partson Jaure (Dynamos), Peter Muduwa (Highlanders), Rapheal Muduviwa (FC Platinum)
Midfielders: Marlon Mushonga, Devon Chafa, Wellington Taderera (all Ngezi Platinum Stars), Moses Muchenje, William Manondo (both Harare City), Trevor Mavhunga (Triangle United), Kelvin Madzongwe (FC Platinum), Phineas Bhamusi, Ishmael Wadi (both Caps United), Juan Mutudza, King Nadolo (both Dynamos), Valentine Kadonzvo (Chicken Inn), Kelvin Chibunyu (Cranborne Bullets)
Strikers: Prince Dube (Highlanders), Obriel Chirinda (Chicken Inn), Stanley Ngala (FC Platinum) – @ZililoR 