The Chronicle Paris Saint-Germain’s Champions League last 16 second leg at home to German club Borussia Dortmund tomorrow will be played behind closed doors because of the coronavirus outbreak, Paris police said yesterday. The decision comes after the French government on Sunday announced measures to cope with the spread of the virus, including banning all gatherings of more than 1 000 people. France has so far seen more than 1 100 confirmed cases of Covid-19 and 19 deaths. “In accordance with the measures announced . . . last night, the police chief has decided that the match . . . will be played behind closed doors,” said Paris police in a statement. PSG, who would have expected a full house of more than 45 000 fans at the Parc des Princes for the game, issued a statement of their own, saying: “In this context, the club remains fully mobilised to organise the match in the best possible conditions.” The announcement was closely followed by the postponement of the Six Nations rugby match between France and Ireland scheduled for Saturday in Paris, the most high profile sporting events in France to be hit by the coronavirus outbreak. PSG has already had their Ligue 1 match at Strasbourg on Saturday postponed due to the extent of the outbreak in the Alsace region of eastern France. The state of North Rhine Westphalia, where Dortmund is situated, has been the worst hit in Germany, with close to 500 confirmed infections, according to official data. Dortmund won the first leg 2-1 at home last month, leaving PSG requiring a second-leg comeback to avoid a fourth straight exit in the first knockout round of the Champions League. Today’s Champions League clash between Valencia and Italian side Atalanta in Spain will also be played behind closed doors, with the visitors travelling from Bergamo in the Lombardy region which is among the worst hit parts of Italy by the virus. No journalists will be allowed to attend that game either. Meanwhile,  Atletico Madrid coach Diego Simeone is in a confident mood ahead of tomorrow’s Champions League clash with Liverpool, saying his side “don’t feel pressure”. Atletico produced a trademark Simeone-inspired performance in last month’s opening tie as Saul Niguez’s scrambled goal after just four minutes proved to be enough at the Metropolitano as they battled to a 1-0 victory. Much was made after the game of the Reds’ inability to break down Los Colchoneros’ stubborn defence and a similar blueprint is expected to be followed on Merseyside. Despite their excellence in Europe, Simeone’s side have struggled for consistency domestically as they start the weekend fifth in La Liga and in danger of missing out on a Champions League spot. Therefore, staying in Europe’s premier club competition as long as possible would offer them a further avenue into next season’s tournament if they can take the title. Simeone’s future remains uncertain, with him continuously linked with moves elsewhere after eight years in charge and having twice lost in the final, winning the Champions League this term may persuade him that he has done as much as possible for the club. However, first Atletico have to get past holders Liverpool, who will be hoping for another special night at Anfield having produced miraculous performances against the likes of Manchester City and Barcelona in the last two seasons. Simeone’s team are unlikely to provide as much freedom as the Citizens and Barca but despite being expected to put in another stellar showing against Liverpool, the Argentine says they are relaxed about their task. “We don’t feel pressure,” he told reporters. “We are excited. We have a football week in which one prepares to look for important goals.”—  AFP