The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent TWO men have been arrested for allegedly robbing a tuckshop owner of groceries worth $3 000 and $2 000 cash at gunpoint. Dumolwenkosi Dube (27) from Filabusi and Mthabisi Moyo (27) from Kwekwe who were armed with a pistol, went to Ms Nodebate Ndlovu’s tucksho at Stanton Mine in Esigodini and found her with two other people. They allegedly ordered the three to lie down while pointing a firearm at them before robbing Ms Ndlovu. Dube and Moyo were yesterday not asked to plead when they appeared before Gwanda magistrate, Mrs Nomagugu Sibanda facing an armed robbery charge. They were remanded in custody to March 17. Prosecuting, Miss Faith Mutukwa said the pair robbed Ms Ndlovu on December 5 last year at around 7PM. “On 5 December 2019 at around 7PM Dube and Moyo went to Ms Ndlovu tuckshop in Stanton Mine and ordered her to open the door as they wanted to see her. Ms Ndlovu who was in the company of Mr Alfred Ndlovu and Ms Nomalanga Ncube refused to open and ordered the pair to leave,” she said. “Dube and Moyo began banging the door with logs in a bid to get it open and Ms Ndlovu eventually opened to find out what the accused persons wanted. Dube and Moyo entered the shop while armed with a pistol and ordered the trio to lie down.” Miss Mutukwa said the pair then demanded cash from Ms Ndlovu and she handed them $2 000. They further took some groceries from the shop and fled. In another case, two men have been arrested while their accomplice is still at large for allegedly defrauding a gold and diamond buyer of US$3 000 under the pretext of selling him the minerals. Philip Mpofu (63) from Nkulumane in Bulawayo and Mandlenkosi Sibanda (33) from Filabusi were not asked to plead when they appeared before Gwanda magistrate, Mrs Sibanda facing a fraud charge. They were remanded in custody to March 16. Prosecuting, Mr Mncedisi Dube said the pair and their accomplice only identified as SaThembelani met the complainant Mr Tshiyane Ncube on January 18 and indicated that they were selling gold and diamond pieces. ‘’On 18 January Mpofu, Sibanda and their accomplice met Mr Ncube at Stanmore Business Centre in Gwanda and told him that they were selling pieces of gold and diamond which were in Esigodini. They convinced Mr Ncube to give them US$3 000 after indicating he would go with SaThembelani to Esigodini to collect the minerals,” Mr Dube said. He said along the way SaThembelani indicated that he wanted to relieve himself and disappeared. Mr Ncube reported the matter to the police leading to the accused’s arrest. Mr Dube said Mpofu and Sibanda were arrested on February 6 near Marcs Garage in Bulawayo after being chased by the police for about 50 metres. – @DubeMatutu.