The Chronicle Joseph Madzimure and Cletus Mushanawani FORMER Zanu PF youth league secretary for commissariat Godfrey Tsenengamu has been expelled from the revolutionary party for the second time in less than 5 years. Tsenengamu who becomes the first member to be expelled under the new dispensation was once shown the exit door during the late former President Mugabe’s reign in 2015 for attacking the party leadership on social media as well abusing party resources. The sacking of Tsenengamu follows last month’s suspension of the secretary for youth affairs Cde Pupurai Togarepi, his deputy, Cde Lewis Matutu as well as the former youth commissar for indiscipline. In its first meeting of the year, the Politburo decided that Cde Togarepi will remain a Central Committee member, while Cdes Matutu and Tsenengamu remain card carrying members. Cdes Matutu and Tsenengamu were suspended for 12 months and were directed to go under a rigorous training at Chitepo School of Ideology  for three months before they were allowed to contest for any position in the party. However, Tsenengamu defied the Politburo directive and continued with his ranting behaviour, while Matutu has started the ideology lectures. Briefing journalists soon after the 337th session of the Politburo at the party headquarters in Harare yesterday, Zanu PF’s national secretary for administration, Dr Obert Mpofu said Tsenengamu had been expelled for indiscipline. An unanimous resolution was passed by the Politburo that the former youth secretary for commissariat be expelled due to his intransigence and continued disparaging of senior party members. Earlier on President Mnangagwa had called on party members not to allow personal interests to threaten the unity in the party. While addressing the 337th Ordinary Session of the Politburo, the President and First Secretary of the party, said Zanu PF cannot afford to be preoccupied with sideshows and negative noises meant to cause despondency among members. “The 2023 harmonised general elections are just around the corner and we should now begin to intensify our preparations,” he said. President Mnangagwa called on the party to remain united and disciplined, with Politburo members leading by example. “Let us never allow personal interests and ambitions to rise to levels which threaten the collective good of the party. Our energies should be focused towards party building, harmony and unity, as well as increased economic productivity,” he said. All departments of the party have been directed to revisit the 2018 elections manifesto to measure their progress in implementing programmes laid out. Zimbabwe is approaching the half-way mark since the last elections were held and won by Zanu PF, hence the call to assess progress in the implementation of promises made by the party. President Mnangagwa said he expects reports highlighting concrete milestones achieved to date, while intervention strategies must be proffered for plans that are yet gain much traction. “The party must deliver on its promises,” said President Mnangagwa. Party members have been challenged to constantly read and adhere to the provisions of the constitution which outlines the duties of all members. Party leaders at all levels are not expected to drag Zanu PF into disrepute, especially when dealing with the media. Said the President: “We must be cautious when making comments in opposition papers as their editorial policies seldom advance the interest of the party. “Let us therefore shame our detractors who thrive on any mistakes we make or disunity we display.” President Mnangagwa yesterday said it was disheartening to note that the voice of the party and Government has remained inaudible when it comes to defending Zanu PF and Government policies and programmes. “This is against the present, unrelenting onslaught against us by our detractors. I yet again challenge the party membership and Government functionaries to speak up, act and occupy the space. “In the same vein, we are observing continued worrisome trends to advance the regime change agenda, not just in Zimbabwe and Zanu PF in particular, but also within all former liberation movements in our region,” he said. Party members have been encouraged to reject and expose divisive elements, to remain loyal and unwavering in their support of the party. President Mnangagwa also challenged the party leadership to remain vigilant and to constantly share notes with their counterparts in the region, adding that leaders must remain in constant contact with the grassroots membership and keep them adequately briefed on all party and Government activities.