The Chronicle Things to consider when you and your employees travel. Remember, do not travel except if it is absolutely necessary. – Before travelling – Make sure your organisation and its employees have the latest information on areas where Covid-19 is spreading. You can find this at https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports/ – Based on the latest information, your organisation should assess the benefits and risks related to upcoming travel plans. -Avoid sending employees who may be at higher risk of serious illness (eg older employees and those with medical conditions such as diabetes, heart and lung disease) to areas where Covid-19 is spreading. – Make sure all persons travelling to locations reporting Covid-19 are briefed by a qualified professional (e.g. staff health services, health care provider or local public health partner) – Consider issuing employees who are about to travel with small bottles (under 100 CL) of alcohol-based hand rub. This can facilitate regular hand-washing. -While travelling: – Encourage employees to wash their hands regularly and stay at least one metre away from people who are coughing or sneezing -Ensure employees know what to do and who to contact if they feel ill while traveling. – Ensure that your employees comply with instructions from local authorities where they are travelling. If, for example, they are told by local authorities not to go somewhere they should comply with this. Your employees should comply with any local restrictions on travel, movement or large gatherings. -When you or your employees return from travelling: – Employees who have returned from an area where Covid-19 is spreading should monitor themselves for symptoms for 14 days and take their temperature twice a day. – If they develop even a mild cough or low grade fever (ie a temperature of 37.3 C or more) they should stay at home and self-isolate. This means avoiding close contact (one metre or nearer) with other people, including family members. They should also telephone their healthcare provider or the local public health department, giving them details of their recent travel and symptoms. — WHO