The Chronicle Advice on visiting China We want to say that all those with plans to visit China are in the mean time being discouraged to go unless absolutely necessary and all the other countries which are affected, we are recommending that just stay at home and be safe and we keep Zimbabwe clean. Let us have a look at the response to the coronavirus outbreak by Zimbabwe.  The national response, Madam President, mechanism for surveillance and early detection of any possible cases was activated on 24th January, 2020 and by mid February, the capacity building of all identified thematic areas to deal effectively with any cases had been conducted. On 22nd January, we managed to visit Robert Mugabe International Airport to assess the airport and port health state of preparedness.  On the same day, we also held a Press conference to discuss the Ministry’s preparedness for the Covid-19 and in a meeting attended by the airport management, all key airport staff and media were available.  We also held bilateral discussions, Madam President, with the Chinese Embassy.  We further had a tour of Victoria Falls International Airport and also the ground port at Victoria Falls to assess their surveillance system, the quarantine and isolation facility and the district of Hwange state of preparedness. We found the airport at Victoria Falls as the best facility in terms of isolation and quarantine facilities. On 31 January the National Rapid Response Team, through the Emergency Operations Centre completed a day long coronavirus readiness check list for Zimbabwe to see what is in place, what the gaps are, what can be done and what has to be done.  The team came up with a budgeted plan for Bulawayo’s Joshua, Nqabuko Airport, Beitbridge Ground Port and Plumtree Ground Port.  We also managed to visit all these to assess their readiness to detect and manage any possible cases of Covid-19.   We shall continue to do the visits, Madam President, and I have personally made the assessments and I have been to all the border areas. – Minister of Health and Child care Dr Obadiah Moyo