The Chronicle As a cosmopolitan metropolis, Bulawayo is definitely the best place to host Zimbabwe’s 40th birthday bash. The headline event during Independence Day, which is usually at the National Sports Stadium in Harare, is for the first time in the country’s history moving to Barbourfields Stadium. This historic event which will be presided over by President Mnangagwa, will be beamed live by the national broadcaster. It, therefore, goes without saying that unity of purpose is needed in Bulawayo to ensure the successful hosting of this event. Such honour must be rewarded by organisation, dedication, patriotism and humility. It is against this background that we take our hats off for Bulawayo mayor Councillor Solomon Mguni who has called on the people of Matabeleland region to rise above political differences and come in their numbers for the main programme of the Independence Day celebrations. Bulawayo province was selected to host this year’s main Independence Day celebrations after Government — in line with its devolution thrust — resolved to decentralise the main programme of national events. Clr Mguni hit the nail on the head. The only thing standing in the way of the successful hosting of the celebrations in Bulawayo is political differences. The fact that Bulawayo City Council and Parliamentary representation is almost 100 percent opposition MDC-Alliance must not be a cause of conflict in the city when it comes to such an important national event. Said Clr Mguni in an article we carried yesterday: “This is a good development for the city and the region. Therefore, residents must rise above politics and participate in this as it’s for a national cause. These national events should be devolved to other centres and communities so that people in those areas feel that they are part of the country. It was not good that all national events were being held in Harare, the country is bigger than Harare.” The mayor has broken the ice. It is now time for the provincial leadership to work together. The 40th Independence Day celebrations must never be forgotten. Gallant sons and daughters of the soil who took up arms to liberate Zimbabwe are watching over us all. Thousands of them did not live long enough to taste the freedom they longed for. The freedom we all enjoy today, as Zanu-PF, MDC-Alliance and all other political parties was bought by blood. The celebrations will also be a time to reflect. How can the lives of ordinary Zimbabweans be improved by the political leadership? Mainly, Zanu-PF and MDC-Alliance. After winning in various areas during the July 2018 general elections, Zanu-PF and MDC-Alliance have a shared responsibility of turning around the economy, providing quality services, creating jobs and laying a strong foundation for the achievement of an upper-middle income economy by 2030. Officially opening the 334th Session of the Zanu-PF Politburo ahead of the 18th Zanu-PF Annual National People’s Conference in Goromonzi, President Mnangagwa said the conference must provide appropriate policy direction to Government and outline achievable goals in line with Vision 2030. The same message can apply on Independence Day. All national goals must be achievable and fit into the bigger picture. And all Zimbabweans must work together regardless of political affiliation.