The Chronicle THE holding of this year’s main programme of the 40th Independence celebrations at the iconic Barbourfields in Bulawayo is significant in many ways, in as far as charting a new trajectory by the Second Republic of fostering unity and inclusivity. Two years into his reign, President Mnangagwa decided to devolve the holding of the main Independence Day celebrations to provinces to ensure unity, the spirit of inclusivity and for Zimbabweans to be in touch with the country’s liberation history. Speaking during a meeting with civil society organisations from the Matabeleland region at State House in Bulawayo last month, President Mnangagwa said this year’s main Independence Day celebrations will be held in Bulawayo for the first time in recognition of the role the city played in the liberation war history. “We have already made a decision that beginning this year we will be holding our National Independence Day celebrations outside the City of Harare. For 39 years independence main celebrations were held in Harare but I realised that Independence is not for Hararians. As a result of that we have now chosen to celebrate our 40th year of independence in the City of Bulawayo,” he said. “The nationalism of this country was here, the likes of Burombo (Benjamin) were from here. Furthermore, Bulawayo is the second largest city in our country. I’m counting on all stakeholders in Bulawayo and the greater Matabeleland region to ensure that our 40th Independence Day celebrations are historic and a memorable success.” Bulawayo, the country’s second largest city, was chosen to host the first main celebrations outside the capital, is cosmopolitan in its make up to symbolise, if not enhance the unity that exists among Zimbabweans. Historically, the city has institutions like the Stanley Square and Hall, Luveve Beit Hall, that are associated with the nascent stages of the liberation struggle. There are also institutions like White City Stadium and Barbourfields that hosted major political gatherings pre- and post-Independence. The city produced trade unionists that later became nationalists like Benjamin Burombo, Masotsha Ndlovu and politicians like Herbert Ushewokunze, Simon Muzenda, Joshua Nkomo, Jason Ziyaphapha Moyo, Lazarus Nkala, Dumiso Dabengwa and Sydney Malunga, just to mention a few. The city also produced prominent entertainers like Dorothy Masuku, The Cool Crooners, Lovemore Majaivana, Don Gumbo, Augustine Musarurwa, Fanyana Dube and Solomon Skuza, among others. In sports the city produced the Ndlovu brothers Adam, Peter and Madinda, Aleck Mwanza, Gibson Homela, Greg Faasen, John Chipukula Phiki aka John Walker, Willard Khumalo, Tito Paketh, Moses Madalaboy Moyo, Ebson Muguyo, Douglas Maneto, Shadreck Ngwenya, Tymon Mabaleka, Titus Majola, Patrick Flyer, Proud “Kilimanjaro” Chinembiri and Thamsanqa Dube, among others. Bulawayo has also hosted African Championships, Cosafa tournaments, and American wrestlers like the Bushwackers and others. It also hosted international acts like UB40, Buju Banton, Percy Sledge, The Hurricanes, Koffi Olomide, Soul Brothers and Lucky Dube, among others. Barbourfields, popularly known as BF, is also the homeground of football giants Highlanders Football Club whose history and aspirations are almost intertwined with that of the city. It has also, over the years, hosted some of the most memorable matches pitting Bosso, as Highlanders is affectionately known, and fellow football giants like Dynamos, Caps United, the now defunct Zimbabwe Saints, among others. From Africa, South Africa’s Orlando Pirates and Mamelodi Sundowns, Al Ahly from Egypt, Esperance from Tunisia, among others. Socially, BF hosted the city’s biggest wedding of Mr Frank Khumalo in the 1990s. It is against this background that the people of Bulawayo and surrounding areas should come in their numbers for the 40th Independence celebrations to confirm and carry on the legacy of the city in terms of its richness in diversity and ability to host memorable events. On its part, the Government has set up committees to prepare for the big event and ensure that the event is smooth flowing. Bulawayo provincial administrator Mrs Khonzani Ncube said Barbourfields was selected because of its size to accommodate residents from the city and visitors from the other nine provinces. “We have started preparations for the celebrations for the main Independence Day celebrations that will be held in Bulawayo and for the first time outside Harare. The committees are working flat out to make sure that the celebrations are a success, we have included an additional committee to deal with accommodation to cater for visitors from outside Bulawayo coming for the celebrations,” said Mrs Ncube.  “We settled for Barbourfields because it has a bigger capacity compared to white City Stadium and again, we considered the catchment from Makokoba, Mzilikazi, Nguboyenja suburbs, among others close to the stadium.” Mrs Ncube said residents living far from Barbourfields would be provided transport to the venue and back home after the end of proceedings. “We are also expecting visitors from the other 9 provinces who are coming to join us in celebrating this milestone. Bulawayo is known for its hospitality and we will pull all stops to make sure that everyone feels welcome,” she said.