The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter GOVERNMENT has said travellers coming from coronavirus (Covid-19) affected areas should self-quarantine for three weeks as it intensifies efforts to ensure that the country is safe from the virus which has killed more than 3 000 people globally. The virus was first detected in Wuhan, China, but has spread to other countries with more than 100 000 infections being recorded across the world. Neighbouring South Africa on Thursday confirmed its first coronavirus case, making it the closest country to Zimbabwe to have a Covid-19 patient. The South African patient, a 38-year-old man, had visited Italy with his wife and two children among others when he tested positive when he came back home. Government has since urged South Africa to be more vigilant in screening for the virus, to ensure that it does not spread within and beyond its borders. In a statement yesterday, Health and Child Care Permanent Secretary Dr Agnes Mahomva said Government will continue to follow the World Health Organisation guidelines on the detection and screening of travellers. She said in the meantime citizens should minimise travelling outside the country. Dr Mahomva said travellers coming from areas with COVID-19 should also bring medical clearances from their health practitioners confirming that they are coronavirus free. “As such, all travellers from countries with confirmed Covid-19 cases are screened at ports of entry on arrival in Zimbabwe. Please note, however, that travellers arriving from countries with local transmission of Covid-19 are in addition to being screened, advised to self-quarantine for 21-days,” said Dr Mahomva. “Self-quarantine means staying at home and avoiding situations that could facilitate the transmission of the Coronavirus such as: going to school or other crowded places and social gatherings and events where you may meet many people.” She said travellers with Covid-19 like symptoms such as fever, cough, shortness of breath should be immediately taken to isolation hospitals. The country has two isolation hospitals Thorngrove Infectious Disease Hospital in Bulawayo and Wilkins Hospital in Harare. The Bulawayo City Council (BCC) said it was working closely with Government among other health stakeholders to ensure the region can handle any identified case. The city’s acting health services director Mr Charles Malaba said Thorngrove Infectious Disease Hospital is expected to handle any recorded or suspected case from the southern part of Zimbabwe. — @nqotshili