The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter GOVERNMENT has announced new 2020 public examinations fees and released $150 million to Zimbabwe School Examination Council (Zimsec) to subsidise fees for those learning at Government schools, local authority and not-for-profit mission schools. The Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education announced the new examination fees structure and payment deadlines yesterday. As a way of cushioning parents and guardians, Government will subsidies candidates at government schools, local authority and not-for-profit mission schools by paying 53 percent of the total examination fees while learners from private institutions will pay the full amount. This means that Grade Seven candidates registered at private institutions will pay a total of $264 for all their five subjects while those at public institutions will pay $125 for all subjects. At Ordinary Level candidates will pay $190 per subject at private institutions and $90 at public institutions while Advanced Level candidates will pay $351 and $165 per subject at private and public institutions respectively. Those re-sitting for public examinations will also pay full examination fees. After Zimsec increased examination fees last month, Government ordered it to revert to fees that were approved in 2015 when O-Level candidates were paying $15 per subject and $26 for A-Level. In a statement, Primary and Secondary Education Minister Cain Mathema said the new examination fees were arrived at after wide consultations with stakeholders in the education sector. “Government is releasing RTGS $150 million to Zimsec with immediate effect to get the preparations for the 2020 June and November examinations going and will avail the balance to Zimsec once the total candidature from the public schools for the June and November examinations is ascertained,” said Minister Mathema. When asked if those who had already paid following the 2015 fees structure as directed last month will have to top up to reach the new examination fees announced yesterday, the Minister declined to comment. He, however, said Government was subsidising examination fees to ensure that no learner fails to sit for public examinations. “I would like to advise all parents and guardians of candidates in Grade 7, O and A-levels that, in 2020, Government will be contributing 53 percent of the examination fees for candidates in public schools while parents and guardians will take up 47 percent. All candidates from private schools and colleges at Grade 7, O and A-levels will meet the full cost of the examination fees,” said Minister Mathema. “The public schools where 53 percent of the examination fees will be paid by Government are: government schools, local authority schools and not-for-profit mission schools.” He said candidates who will register for the same subjects in June and November examinations, will bear the full costs for the November examination. Minister Mathema urged education stakeholders to support pupils as schools lay the foundation for their future. “As we prepare our learners for life and work, I would like to exhort all who have a contribution to make to the success of our children to do everything possible so that they are sufficiently equipped to make a telling contribution to the sustainable development of our country. Getting it right at primary and secondary education level will give the nation the confidence that we are building from a solid foundation,” said Minister Mathema. — @nqotshili