The Chronicle “It is no longer a matter of if, but when our country will have these cases.” These were the words used by President Mnangagwa on Thursday as he launched Zimbabwe’s US$26 million preparedness and response plan for coronavirus. The reality is that Zimbabwe cannot evade Covid-19. By facing this reality, President Mnangagwa is preparing not only his Government, but citizens as well for, what at the moment, seems to be inevitable. Preparedness measures must now reflect the reality on the ground — Covid-19 is coming. By mid-day yesterday, the number of people infected by the coronavirus in South Africa had soared to 202. A total of 52 new infections were recorded with Gauteng still being the epicentre of the virus. According to experts, over 60-percent of South Africans will feel the direct impact of Covid-19, even if they don’t contract the virus. From imposing travel bans to prohibiting mass gatherings and shutting down schools, governments across Africa are increasingly adopting sweeping measures in a bid to curb the spread of the new coronavirus. Another neighbouring country, Zambia, on Wednesday confirmed its first two cases of Covid-19. As of March 19, 33 African countries had reported more than 600 cases and 17 deaths due to Covid-19. More than 40 people were reported to have recovered. With every day that goes by, Covid-19 gets closer and closer to Zimbabwe. The national preparedness and response plan for coronavirus is aimed at building an integrated and coordinated strategy on preventing the spread of the virus causing Covid-19 and mitigating its effects. President Mnangagwa also directed that all schools, colleges and universities must close next Tuesday as the Government steps up efforts to ensure any outbreak of coronavirus in Zimbabwe is controlled and minimised. The US$26 million preparedness and response plan for coronavirus will entail: – Planning, monitoring and coordination — US$1 424 100; – Risk communication and community engagement — US$1 098 500; – Surveillance, rapid response and case investigation — US$4 159 890; – Points of entry — US$112 440; – National laboratory system — US$3 119 454; – Infection prevention and control — US$238 850; – Case management – US$4 090 540; and – Logistics, procurement and supply management — US$12 144 606. This well detailed and swift response by President Mnangagwa and his Government is commendable as it shows that Zimbabwe is being proactive in responding to what is the most likely scenario, a Covid-19 case being reported anytime from now. However, while Government is playing its part, authorities at grassroots level seem to be sleeping on the job. As we reported yesterday, in Bulawayo, schools, hospitals as well as old people and children’s homes, have been found wanting in terms of adopting essential precautionary measures to curb the spread of Covid-19. At Mpilo Central Hospital a Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Health and Child Care that was touring the hospital was shocked to discover that there were no hand sanitisers at entrances. At the United Bulawayo Hospitals (UBH), there were no hand sanitisers for patients and visitors, but one was provided for the parliamentary portfolio committee members at the hospital boardroom. UBH chief executive officer Mrs Nonhlanhla Ndlovu told the parliamentarians that the hospital only had 10 by 750ml bottles of hand sanitiser for the whole hospital. And these are the biggest hospitals in the region. The major referral institutions taking care of Matabeleland North and South, Bulawayo, Midlands and Masvingo. And at both central hospitals, visitors and patients are not being sanitised. Such lack of seriousness can get hundreds, if not thousands, killed by Covid-19. The Ministry of Health and Child Care must act fast to ensure that these key institutions are well equipped to deal with coronavirus. Denial will not take us anywhere. President Mnangagwa was realistic in his assessment and unfortunately, there is no alternative. The likelihood of coronavirus penetrating our borders is very high. Management at central hospitals must be exemplary. This is a war we can’t afford to lose.