The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter BULAWAYO City FC could pay dearly for failing to tie down players after being beaten to the signature of experienced striker Charles Sibanda by crosstown rivals Bulawayo Chiefs. City are yet to sign players for the 2020 season and risk missing out on other players currently training with the municipal side. The Twitter Kings moved swiftly to sign Sibanda, who had been training with City for about four weeks after being deemed excess baggage at league champions FC Platinum. The 2010 Soccer Star of the Year appeared to be the cornerstone City were missing and his departure could further frustrate coach Philani Ncube’s search of an experienced front man. City lost striker Darryl Nyandoro to Victoria Falls-based First Division side Mosi Rovers and also missed out on gangly forward Nqobile Ndlovu, who has reportedly left their training camp to join ambitious Southern Region Division One side Talen Vision. With their top targets gone, City will turn their hopes on former Young Warriors striker Mgcini Sibanda, whose career has been hogged by injuries, to lead their attack. Mgcini spent the better part of the last two seasons recuperating from injury, but City coach Ncube is willing to risk the former Highlanders’ juniors player with the responsibility of leading their frontline. “We are still searching for a seasoned striker and in the meantime we have Mgcini Sibanda. He has been working hard and has not given us reason to doubt that he can lead us,” said Ncube. The City coach has also shown faith in Lewis Ncube, who was last active in 2018. Lewis was banned from participating in any PSL activities for a year alongside Pelius Dean Sibanda and Bothwell Nyathi after being found guilty of falsifying their ages. He seems to be preferred at right-back ahead of former Young Warriors utility player Leslie Lunga, whose 2019 exploits saw him being invited for trials at FC Platinum by their former coach Norman Mapeza. Some notable players training with City include the experienced trio of defender Kudzai Chideu, defensive midfielder Dominic Mukandi and attacking midfielder Hillary Bakacheza. Ex-Quelaton, Bulawayo Chiefs and How Mine attacking midfielder Eddie Nkulungo and 18-year-old former Bantu Rovers player Mpumelelo Bhebhe, who was with City’s development side last season, are all trying their luck. The municipal club has, however, shut the door on goalkeeper Liberty Chirava, who had been hoping for a return to the club. – @ZililoR