The Chronicle Liverpool appear set to reign supreme over the Premier League — and now also top the standings in Europe too, according to the latest research from CIES Football Observatory. Jurgen Klopp possesses the most valuable squad in the transfer market across the continent’s top-five leagues, the organisation states, ahead of fellow Premier League side Manchester City. The Reds, who are the runaway league leaders and require just two points for their first top-flight title in 30 years, have put together a group worth an aggregated value of £1.27 billion. Having won the Champions League last season, the Anfield outfit have fended off fierce competition from Pep Guardiola’s men, as well as Barcelona and Real Madrid, to earn the achievement. The La Liga title rivals are separated by a sum of just £63 million. The Uefa Super Cup and Fifa Club World Cup were also added to Liverpool’s collection before the coronavirus pandemic brought a halt to sporting action around the world. Chelsea occupy fifth spot in the standings, and the CIES have attributed their value of £917m to the ‘outbreak of many young talents following the transfer ban imposed by Fifa’. Fellow Champions League hopefuls Manchester United find themselves in sixth place, and Tottenham also break into the top 10 — with Jose Mourinho’s men, despite their recent struggles, taking ninth. Kylian Mbappe, worth over £227 million and the most valuable player in the world according to the CIES, is included in Paris Saint-Germain’s roster, which is the seventh most valuable. Juventus complete the top 10, the only Italian club to appear on the list, with the Bundesliga giants a surprise absence. German minnows Paderborn are the basement team in the standings, with a value of just £33.7million. The CIES’ findings are the result of a number of variables. These take into account the length of contract remaining for players, the age, international status, career progression and performances in competitions across duties for both club and country. MOST VALUABLE SQUADS Club Value (sterling) Liverpool 1.27bn Manchester City 1.24bn Barcelona 1.06bn Real Madrid 1.00bn Chelsea 917m Manchester United 917m Paris Saint-Germain 890m Atletico Madrid 760m Tottenham 715m Juventus 712m — Sportsmail