The Chronicle Andile Tshuma It is a blessing that so far, as a nation, we have been spared and there are no confirmed cases of Covid-19. Zimbabweans must however heed Government’s calls for everyone to act responsibly. Each and every one of us must be responsible for our health and that of the person next to us. Teamwork yields results. The Ministry of Health and Child Care has advised against unnecessary international travel. It is therefore in our best interest to heed the call and stay put. While certain trips cannot be avoided and are necessary, a trip to visit family and friends or for that much needed holiday can be postponed until a time which is safer. It is assuring to hear from Government that our brothers and sisters in China are safe and well taken care of. While some people may be of the view that Government must have repatriated Zimbabweans, it could be safer to have them well taken care of in China, than to risk bringing them here, where they would be in confined spaces and very long flights, who knows what could happen there, and here when they arrive. The rapid spread of Covid-19 has captured the world’s attention. Damaging as it may be, this tiny virus is an urgent reminder of our collective vulnerability to transnational threats and of the urgency of common cause to protect the health of people everywhere. While today’s coronavirus crisis constitutes an emergency that requires action now, it is also one that requires action for the future. We are witnessing a crisis but this is also a warning shot and we would be wise to heed it. As the world’s major powers grapple with managing the rapid crisis that coronavirus represents, they need to think beyond their own borders and invest not just in national but also in global responses and defences. This means partnering with Africa to support an emergency response and build capacity to fight the virus. The threat of Covid-19 is real. Government departments, the Public Service Commission and the public sector must all ensure that workplaces are also ready for potential outbreak. While we have been spared so far, we are not immune. It is encouraging that Government is currently training health staff countrywide on disaster preparedness, particularly dealing with disease outbreaks. The Bulawayo City Council Health Services Department has also been doing exceptionally well in capacity building for its staff at health centres. It reassuring to see how the BCC Rapid Response team has been professionally attending to coronavirus scares at the city’s central hospitals, as in the cases on Thursday. The Mpilo Central Hospital Public Relations office has also been helping through communicating with the media, giving timely updates and disclosing information that helps to update the public. When hospitals do not communicate effectively, the public goes into panic. There were rumours of nurses fleeing from patients at hospitals, fearing infection. While the patients were cleared and it was discovered that it was a false alarm, fake news travels fast so hospitals must be proactive and provide reliable information so that the public can be calm. The collective action by Sadc countries also shows that health ministries have the people at heart and are making coordinated efforts to keep people safe. Health Ministers from Sadc on Monday agreed to harmonise and coordinate the region’s preparedness and response to Covid-19, a move that is expected to strengthen preparedness across the region. When we fight as a team, it’s easier to attain victory but fighting as a one-man gang is difficult and the chances of a victory are reduced. Sadc however must learn from African countries who have had to deal with other epidemics such as the Ebola outbreak, which killed thousands of people in Central Africa and other regions. Zimbabwe has dealt with disease outbreaks before, we have been hit by serious outbreaks of cholera and have managed to contain them. While there were mistakes made here and there, lessons were learnt and one can only hope that the powers-that-be in the health sector took down notes and will implement the tried and tested strategies that worked before, re-adapt them and make them suitable should we be unfortunate to have to deal with another outbreak in the country. Preventive measures such as hand washing and sanitisation of surfaces in workplaces and domestic settings should be something that we remind each other all the time. That one moment you forget to wash your hands or sneeze into your palm may spark the beginning of a problem that could cascade to the death of hundreds of people. At household level, we must encourage each other to be extra clean, children must be taught hygiene practices and schools must also do their part as in loco parents, ensuring that cleanliness and hygiene are the coolest rhyme. As it is a weekend, avoiding large gatherings is also ideal. At this time I would suggest that families practise home worship, and fellowship at home with a few families than gather as large crowds. My thoughts. Alternatively, watching sermons and fellowshipping at the ‘online service’ is also a good way to have the big church gathering without actually risking infections. For feedback, catch me on Twitter handle @andile_tshuma or WhatsApp 0778502449.