The Chronicle The United States has decided to ignore the loud voices of reason calling for the unconditional removal of sanctions against Zimbabwe and extended the embargo by one year. The calls for the removal of the illegal sanctions have come from across the globe with Sadc and the AU leading the lobby for the removal of the sanctions which are not only affecting Zimbabwe’s economy but the Sadc region as a whole. China, Cuba and the Non-Aligned Movement have also called for the immediate removal of sanctions but the US has decided not to listen. According to the US, Zimbabwe poses a threat to its foreign policy, a deliberate vague accusation because the US is failing to justify maintaining the embargo given the ongoing political and economic reforms. Only last week Botswana president Dr Mokgweetsi Masisi called on the US and its Western Allies to remove the sanctions against Zimbabwe which he said should be given a chance to realise its potential. Dr Masisi said the continued imposition of sanctions by US and its Western allies was not only affecting the local economy but was also frustrating regional development at large. The US which is finding it difficult to justify extending the sanctions, is making unfounded allegations that Zimbabwe’s security forces last year engaged in acts of extrajudicial killings and rape, a falsehood that must be dismissed with the contempt it deserves. The permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Mr Nick Mangwana who said Government is baffled by the characterisation of the country as a threat to the US foreign policy, said any acts of criminality by anyone are subjected to the criminal justice processes of Zimbabwe. We therefore want to challenge the US to bring forward cases of security forces that have committed murder or rape and were not prosecuted. The US is giving an impression that there is anarchy in this country whereby security forces are killing and raping citizens with impunity which is completely false. There is rule of law and there is a commitment by the Zimbabwean Government and its citizens to uphold and defend fundamental human rights and freedoms. We want to therefore appeal to the US to reconsider its position in the interest of Zimbabweans and citizens of the entire Sadc region that have been adversely affected by the sanctions against Zimbabwe.