The Chronicle Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Background On December 31, 2019, the World Health Organisation (WHO) was informed of cases of pneumonia of unknown cause detected in Wuhan City, Hubei Province of China. On 7 January 2020, the causative pathogen was identified as a novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV). Most of these cases were linked to a seafood, poultry and live wildlife market in Wuhan City, suggesting that the novel coronavirus may have a possible animal origin. Since then the number of cases has continued to increase globally, thus the declaration by WHO of novel Coronavirus disease of 2019 (COVID-19) as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) on 30 January 2020. Following this declaration, the Ministry of Health and Child Care has taken bold steps and stern measures to intensify surveillance for COVID-19 to minimize chances of importation of COVID-19 into Zimbabwe. Further, the Ministry has stepped up preparedness in order to minimise the morbidity and mortality, should COVID-19 spread to Zimbabwe. As of the 8th March 2020, 105 586 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 3 584 deaths (Case Fatality Rate 3.4%) have been reported from 86 countries globally. The majority of these are from China. The number of African countries who have reported confirmed cases has increased to eight (Egypt, Senegal, Tunisia, Morocco, Algeria, Cameroon, South Africa and Nigeria). To date, there is NO confirmed case of COVID-19 in Zimbabwe. However, members of the public are advised to remain vigilant as the risk is still very high and hence the need to continue taking precautionary measures. What is COVID-19? COVID-19 is the infectious disease caused by the most recently discovered coronavirus. This new virus and disease were unknown before the outbreak began in Wuhan, China, in December 2019. What is Corona virus? Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses causing a wide spectrum of illness, ranging from very mild to severe, which may cause illness in animals or humans.  In humans, several coronaviruses are known to cause respiratory infections ranging from the common cold to more severe diseases such as Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS). The most recently discovered coronavirus causes coronavirus disease COVID-19. — WHO