The Chronicle Cuthbert Mavheko Tomorrow Zimbabwe joins the rest of the world in observing World Day of Fight Against Sexual Exploitation. The day has been observed worldwide each year since 2009 to raise awareness against sexual exploitation and abuse, whose main victims are women and young girls. A report from the United Nations says every year millions of women and young girls are kidnapped by international criminal networks, which exploit them sexually, traffic them and keep them trapped in the fetters of prostitution. UNICEF estimates that more than three million children worldwide are affected by prostitution. Sexual exploitation and abuse is defined as ‘threatening or profiting monetarily, socially or politically from the sexual exploitation of another person. This includes threatened physical intrusion of a sexual nature, whether by force or under unequal or coercive conditions, and sexual relations with a child under the age of 18 years.’ While sexual exploitation and abuse violates universally-recognised international legal norms and standards, it is shocking to note that human trafficking for sexual purposes is now a highly lucrative multi-million-dollar business in some countries. A recent BBC report said many tourists travel abroad for sex tourism, for purposes of having sex with young girls, and this has increased prostitution in many countries. In 2017, UN Secretary-General Antonio Gueterres launched a new strategy aimed at preventing and ending sexual exploitation and abuse by UN personnel. A major element of this new approach was the creation of a ‘Circle of Leadership’ for Heads of State and Government to demonstrate resolve and commitment at the highest political level to obliterate the scourge of sexual exploitation. “We at the UN are mobilising to tackle sexual exploitation and abuse in our ranks and ensure that the rights and dignity of victims are front and centre. The era of silence and taboo is over. Everyone, including UN staff, must feel confident to report allegations of abuse. Above all, we must protect those we are mandated to serve,” Mr Gueterres said in a video message. The UN is also improving links with communities and civil society organisations the world over, so that victims and survivors know how to respond, report crimes of a sexual nature, and find support in doing so. Over 100 countries have signed voluntary compacts with the UN to tackle sexual exploitation and abuse. The UN Secretary-General also appointed a UN Victims’ Rights Advocacy and Special Coordinator to align efforts to combat the scourge. A report from one organisation which champions the cause of the girl child in Zimbabwe, says child sexual abuse is often perpetrated against girls between the ages of nine and 15. “Eighty five to ninety percent of abusers are males known to the victims. In most cases, they are either friends of the family, family members or someone with authority over the child such as a teacher, a cleric or even a parent. Only a small percentage of abusers are strangers,” reads the report in part. Sexual abuse is, however, not only perpetrated against girls. According to a UN report, every year nearly a million people are sexually trapped. This includes, not only women and young girls, but boys and young men. Research has shown that there is an increase in reports of boys being sexually abused at school and at home in Zimbabwe. Yesteryear, a 45-year-old woman from Masvingo forced a six-year-old boy to have sex with her and, in the process, infected him with a sexually transmissible disease. The woman was sentenced to 20 years in prison. In a related incident, a 26-year-old Tsholotsho maid allegedly sexually abused her employer’s 14-year-old relative and infected him with a sexually transmissible disease. In yet another sad incident, an 18-year-old maid from Gwabalanda in Bulawayo was incarcerated for 10 years for forcing her employer’s two-year-old son to have sex with her. Psychologists say sexual abuse has devastating effects on victims. They often feel distressed and display a wide range of psychological symptoms. They may feel powerless, ashamed and distrustful of men. The abuse may disrupt a victim’s development and increase the likelihood that they will experience other sexual assaults in the future, or become abusers themselves. Sexual abuse can result in HIV infection or other medical problems. Teenage pregnancies are associated with high health risks. There are, however, precautions that families should take to protect their children from the scourge of sexual abuse. Ms Maureen De Villiers, a psychologist, said, “Parents should realise that child sexual exploitation and abuse is an ever present threat. An alert and educated family is thus the strongest deterrent to abuse. “Parents have a moral obligation to give their children correct information about child sexual abuse in the same manner they give them other safety information, like what to do if there is a fire in their home, for instance. “Over and above this, there is need for parents to be aware of what their children are doing at any given time of the day and who they are with. Put simply, parents should know their children’s friends.” She continued: “Parents should also be careful about choosing babysitters and investigate anyone who offers their child a job that involves working in the home. They should teach their children that if someone watches them undress or touches them in an improper place, they should immediately resist and tell them about it. “Children should not hide anything from their parents but instead tell them everything that happens to them, what they think and how they feel.” Ms De Villiers said parents should listen to their children and always be on the lookout for signs from them, which might indicate fear of a particular individual. “If a child suddenly becomes fearful of being left alone with someone, parents should try to find out why. In this regard, it is important for parents to create an environment in their homes where children are free to talk to them about anything that upsets them. “Children also need to be taught that there are certain parts of their bodies that other people should not look at or touch. They should also be taught to refrain from looking at or touching anyone else’s body in those private areas. “These precautions can be taught as family rules so that when a child finds him/herself in a situation where abuse is likely to occur, he/she can use them in their defence by saying: ‘I am not permitted to do that,’ or: ‘Stop that, I am going to tell my mum.’ “Children who resist, run away, scream, protest strongly, or threaten to tell their parents about things which happen to them have a better chance of stopping or ending abuse,” said Ms De Villiers. She added that if a child is being sexually abused his/her normal behaviour may change. “He or she may become depressed, have trouble sleeping or eating or become angry, withdrawn, anxious and afraid. There are two other factors that, when they occur, indicate that a child is being sexually abused. “The first is a child’s sudden interest in pornography or sexual matters that are inappropriate for his/her age, and secondly physical complaints such as rashes, headaches or stomach aches that have no medical explanation. “Case studies show that few children lie about sexual abuse. So, if a child says he/she has been sexually abused, parents should take him/her seriously. Fear of parental disbelief often keeps children from reporting abuse,” she said. λ Cuthbert Mavheko is a freelance journalist living in Bulawayo. He can be contacted on mobile 0773 963 448.