The Chronicle Zimbabwe and Botswana’s relations were raised to another level when the two countries last Friday signed seven bilateral agreements at the close of the 2nd Botswana-Zimbabwe Bi-National Commission (BNC). President Mnangagwa and his Botswana counterpart, Dr Mokgweetsi Masisi, presided over the closing session. Government ministers from the two countries signed the seven agreements which cover a range of socio-economic development issues. The two countries signed six agreements at the inaugural BNC held in Harare last year. In his remarks on Friday President Mnangagwa said the high-level bilateral platform had helped the two countries to identify common challenges and new opportunities that need to be addressed between now and the 3rd Session of the BNC next year. “I am pleased to note that this session has witnessed the signing of MoUs and agreements which set the foundation for our broader co-operation in the identified areas. We must apply greater determination towards the full implementation of these agreements for the benefit of our two countries and peoples,” said President Mnangagwa. Dr Masisi concurred with President Mnangagwa on the need to ensure swift implementation of the agreements. He also took the opportunity to once again call for the removal of sanctions against Zimbabwe, saying Zimbabwe should be given a chance to realise its potential. Dr Masisi said the continued imposition of sanctions by United States and its Western allies was not only affecting the local economy but was also frustrating regional development at large. He said the debilitating impact of the sanctions was not only affecting the Zimbabwean economy but also economies of neighbouring countries such as Botswana. The call for the removal of sanctions against Zimbabwe are coming from all corners of the globe and it is time the US and its allies listen to reason. We have said it before that given the ongoing political and economic reforms there is no justification to continue maintaining the sanctions against Zimbabwe. Call for the unconditional removal of sanctions have come from Sadc, the AU, China, Cuba and the Non-Aligned Movement. All are agreed that the sanctions are adversely affecting Zimbabwe’s efforts to grow its economic and improve the welfare of its people. President Mnangagwa has however said Zimbabweans will not bury their heads in the sand but will do their best to ensure that despite the sanctions, the country grows its economy using available resources. We want at this juncture to implore Zimbabweans to have a shared vision as they fight a common enemy that is against the country’s prosperity. The country can only realise its vision of an upper middle income economy by 2030 if every citizen puts shoulder to the wheel.