The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter DESPITE other sporting bodies cancelling their competitions due to the ravaging effects of the coronavirus globally, Confederation of African Football (Caf) insisted that all its scheduled competitions will go ahead as planned. The stance by Caf comes after World Football Summit (WFS) organisers yesterday announced the postponement of the event slated for Durban, South Africa, from March 17-18. In a statement on Wednesday, Caf said it was monitoring the evolution of the disease and that no African country had to date been declared a high-risk area. “Caf wishes to inform member associations and the entire African football family that we are closely monitoring the evolution of the coronavirus (Covid-19) around the world and in particular the African continent. According to World Health Organisation (WHO), no African country to date has been declared a high risk,” Caf said. “Consequently, Caf has decided to maintain the schedule of all competitions. “Also, Caf has been informed of the restrictive measures taken by the authorities of some member associations and is in contact to find solutions on a case-by-case basis, with the option of the organisation of matches behind closed doors.” A Caf medical committee delegation is scheduled to visit Cameroon on Saturday and Sunday to assess preventative measures taken by the local organising committee of the Total African Nations Championship (Chan). Chan is scheduled for April 4-25. Meanwhile, the WFS said it took the decision to postpone the event following a declaration of the Coronavirus as a global pandemic by WHO. “After closely monitoring the evolving coronavirus outbreak and assessing the risk to our visitors, we have concluded, together with the provincial government of KwaZulu-Natal, our main partner, that this is the only way to guarantee the well-being of all our visitors,” said WFS. WFS said it had been extremely excited by its first-ever African summit and looked forward to welcoming the continent’s most relevant leaders and stakeholders and the decision to call it off was heart-breaking.