The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent TWO men have been arrested after they allegedly broke into a mine owner’s homestead in Gwanda while armed with machetes and robbed the miner of $22 000, two cellphones and two gold weighing scales. Melinkosi Moyo (27) and Maxwell Banda (38) both from Gwanda were not asked to plead when they appeared before Gwanda magistrate, Mrs Nomagugu Sibanda, facing a robbery charge. They were remanded in custody to March 23. Prosecuting, Miss Glenda Nare said the pair, who were in the company of an accomplice who is still at large, robbed the complainant on February 6 at Banshee Mine in Gwanda. “On 6 February at around 2AM the accused persons and their accomplice who is still at large went to the complainant’s home at Banshee Mine while armed with machetes and knocked on the door. The complainant refused to open and they opened the door and gained entry,” he said. “They threatened to assault the complainant and his wife with machetes and they demanded money. They took $22 000, two cellphones and two gold weighing scales and fled. The matter was reported to the police resulting in their arrest.” In another incident, a 19-year-old man has appeared in court for robbery, assault and malicious damage to property charges. Masiya Siziba from Nkwidze Village was convicted on his own plea of guilty to all charges by Gwanda magistrate, Mrs Nomagugu Sibanda. For the first count he was sentenced to 30 days imprisonment which was suspended on condition that he restitutes $150. For the second count he was sentenced to 15 months imprisonment of which six months were suspended on condition that he does not commit a similar offence within the next two years. Nine months were further suspended on condition that he performs 350 hours of community service at Gwanda Magistrates Court. For the third count he was sentenced to three months imprisonment which was suspended on condition that he does not commit a similar offence within the next two years.- @DubeMatutu