The Chronicle Munyaradzi Musiiwa, Midlands Correspondent ZANU-PF Midlands Province has embarked on a cell restructuring exercise where cell elections will be held in the province’s 653 party districts. The contestants will compete for 21 positions. Speaking after a Provincial Coordinating Committee yesterday, Zanu-PF Midlands provincial spokesperson Cde Cornelius Mpereri said the exercise will start today and will end on March 31. Cde Mpereri said it will pave way for branch and district elections that will be conducted later. “We are embarking on restructuring of our cells and it is an annual thing. We hope that we would have completed the exercise by 31 March. The cell is our core structure of the party and every Politburo member belongs to a certain cell. In the province we have 653 party districts and we will conduct elections in all these districts. Each cell structure has 21 position holders and a minimum of 50 members. This exercise will pave way for branch and district elections. It also enables us to do the head count for all the party membership in the province,” he said. Cde Mpereri said there were no suspended members at provincial level and all members were therefore eligible to participate in the elections. “We do have other disciplinary issues that are pending but at the moment every member in the province is eligible to participate in the elections. There are those that were suspended in 2014 and all those people have served their terms and no one including MPs are on suspension,” he said. Cde Mpereri implored party members to be disciplined during the restructuring exercise. He said the restructuring exercise will help the province attain its target to mobilise more than 800 000 votes for the revolutionary party come 2023. Cde Mpereri said the Provincial Coordinating Committee also pledged to support all Government programmes including the clean-up campaigns that are conducted every month. “We are the ruling party and it is incumbent upon us to support all Government programmes. We want to start by taking heed of President Mnangagwa’s call to participate in the clean-up campaigns that are held on the first Friday of every month. We will turn out in our numbers to ensure that our environments are clean,” he said.