The Chronicle Showbiz Correspondent
Zimdancehall artiste Mandie Mae is a woman on a mission – to be a top entertainer in the country and perhaps conquer the continent and the world. Born Nomagugu Amanda Nkomo, Mandie Mae (Bad Gyal) is an Afro-Reggae and Afro-dancehall artiste, dancer and pianist who dabbles in acting. Mandie Mae started music in late 2018 with the release of her smash single Mash up di place. The song got her noticed by people thereby helping her to pursue her passion. Those who follow the Credesi platform organised by Iyasa, every month-end, would have seen Mandie Mae blaze the stage with her performance this past July. Her song 99 percent was number one on Skyz Metro FM’s top 20 chart show for three consecutive weeks and peaked on number two at Khulumani FM. The 19-year-old said with her music she wants to help people understand that they are not alone as they face every day struggles. “I want people to understand that they aren’t the only ones facing struggles. If you can’t eat bread every day, there are many of us who are in the same predicament. One day you’ll pull through. This is the message behind most of my songs,” said Mandie Mae. There is a back story to the inspiration around her music. “I live with my mother and I haven’t known my father since birth. At some point, my single mother wasn’t working. It was really hard at that time and I couldn’t just drop out of school like that, I wanted to continue. At the age of 15 I had to take up a job as a house help so that I could pay for my fees. I did so for about two years and even paid for my exam fees,” said the former Founders High School pupil. This is the reason why her other name is Bad Gyal (Bad Girl), which she says is synonymous with her upbringing. “I named myself Bad Gyal because of how I have been through the worst, but I’m still living and working towards living my dreams. Bad Gyal is Patois (Jamaican lingo) meaning Tuff Seed,” said Mandie Mae. She said growing up in Newton West in Bulawayo, she was surrounded by reggae music. “I’m in love with the Jamaican accent as it is closer to our language. I grew up in an environment that saw me listening to reggae. This is where I fell in love with the music. Although I used to sing at church and all, I thought Reggae and dancehall it’s gonna be for me,” said Mandie Mae. She said people should expect more music and more visuals this year.