The Chronicle FOUR Liverpool stars dominate the shortlist for the PFA Player of the Year Award. The recently crowned Premier League champions have Virgil van Dijk, Jordan Henderson, Sadio Mane and Trent Alexander-Arnold on the list of nominees. Manchester City’s Kevin de Bruyne and Raheem Sterling make up the six-man shortlist. Liverpool dominated last season, with Jurgen Klopp’s men securing their first Premier League title. The Reds finished 18 points ahead of City in second and a staggering 33 points ahead of Manchester United in third. Their title success made Liverpool reigning European, World and Premier League champions. Klopp’s men had secured the Premier League title with seven games remaining, which broke the previous record of the earliest a team win the league. Liverpool equalled a number of records last season, including winning 18 consecutive games, winning 32 matches overall and picking up 57 points from a possible 57 at home. Reds star Henderson and City talisman De Bruyne are the favourites to pick up the PFA Player of the Year award. Liverpool right-back Alexander-Arnold, meanwhile, has also been named in the men’s young player of the year category. He will be up against Manchester United’s Marcus Rashford and Mason Greenwood, Mason Mount and Tammy Abraham of Chelsea and Arsenal ace Bukayo Saka. The winners will be announced on Tuesday.  Men’s player of the year Trent Alexander-Arnold – Liverpool Kevin De Bruyne – Manchester City Jordan Henderson – Liverpool Sadio Mane- Liverpool Raheem Sterling – Manchester City Virgil Van Dijk – Liverpool Women’s player of the year Beth England – Chelsea Sophie Ingle – Chelsea Kim Little – Arsenal Vivianne Miedema – Arsenal Guro Reiten – Chelsea Ji So-yun – Chelsea Men’s young player Tammy Abraham – Chelsea Trent Alexander-Arnold – Liverpool Marcus Rashford – Manchester United Mason Greenwood – Manchester United Mason Mount – Chelsea Bukayo Saka – Arsenal Women’s young player Erin Cuthbert – Chelsea Lauren Hemp – Manchester City Chloe Kelly – Manchester City Georgia Stanway – Manchester City Lauren James – Manchester United Ellie Roebuck – Manchester City ⁃           Express