The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Events promotions company, Toundtainment Events has been hailed for unearthing talent from Plumtree town through its series of virtual competitions that are being held weekly. Popularly referred to as Titji, Plumtree is home to many talented artistes including radio personality DJ Phuti, Allen Ndoda, promoter PK, Mokis Connection, Martin and Ndolwane Super Sounds, Sotsha Moyo, Lobs Buhegwedu and Clement Magwaza. Through Toundtainment artistes who have potential are being unearthed during competitions that are being conducted online. The competitions could not have been conducted at a better time than now when there is a lockdown which has forced many people to turn to virtual platforms for entertainment. The virtual competitions started last month with a dancing competition which was won by nine-year-old Khanyile Dube followed by a singing competition that was won by South Africa-based musician Brian “BRK” Khupe. A DJs competition was held a week after and was won by DJ Macasette and thereafter, 12-year-old artiste Nadine Nyathi aka Sphe The Poet was crowned winner of the poetry competition. This past weekend, Franklin Mpofu won the art drawing showcase competition while ambitious Nonhlanhla Mahle Ncube also emerged winner for the handcraft competition. Toundtainment founder, Handsome Sibanda said these competitions are being held as a way to motivate artistes, especially up-and-coming ones, to keep showcasing their talents. “Plumtree has always been marginalised in terms of arts exposure hence this initiative meant to provide a platform for local artistes to showcase their talents. “I introduced the competitions so that these young artistes could get exposure and also make some money as Covid-19 has affected their income as they cannot stage shows,” Sibanda said. He thanked businesses from Plumtree that are supporting the initiative and said he hoped after the exposure, artistes will find big sponsors. Toundtainment Events which was formed in 2002 has since inception, been on a quest to put Plumtree on the map by hosting notable events which have attracted patrons from outside the town. Notable events the company has hosted include appearances by Lucy and Cosmo from Generations, Gp Ma Orange, the late Christopher “Gunmen” Khubeka and Madluphuthu at various outlets in the town. – @mthabisi_mthire.