The Chronicle Stephen Mpofu
“Whether the weather be good, whether the weather be bad we shall weather the weather.” The motto above should fire indefatigable determination and unflinching intrepidity by unmitigated patriots of Zimbabwe in their support of the revolution that brought independence to this country from oppressive colonial rule in 1980 so that the revolution remains forever and ever more a determinant of freedom and self-determination for other black states to emulate. Which implies that Zimbabweans, regardless of their race, religion or creed become the ears and eyes of our Second Republic in order that peace and stability become uninterrupted fillips for development. The resultant unity of purpose will obviously insulate our nation against both external and internal enemies, the latter as running dogs of Western imperialism apparently forever aggrieved at their black servants’ becoming masters of their own affairs. Of course this also implies that those proud to be Zimbabweans should join hands against sell-outs fighting our Government and its success by paid agents of imperialism. Some of the self-exiled Zimbabweans must have blued millions of dollars out of the country while serving as Government ministers or holding down other, important Government posts and had the money stashed away in foreign bank accounts or used to build expensive houses in which they now reside. Members of G-40 must have secretly prayed and entreated the devil for the waning health and age of President Mugabe to put him out of office so that they could scramble into power themselves. Well the story of what happened after Cde Mugabe was gone is now water under the bridge. Still, those characters had siphoned millions of dollars out and into foreign countries where some of them now lead cushy lives while our economy, short of adequate capital as its life blood as a result also of illegal Western sanctions and the corona pandemic lockdown barely keeps the country on its feet. But surely African states harbouring political outcasts from other countries on the continent should realise that as hosts they turn themselves into collateral enemies of those countries from which their guests originate and as a result continental African unity, peace and stability continue as ever-receding values, like mirages. It is known that initiatives by the Government of President Emmerson Mnangagwa resulted in millions of some of the money secretly taken out of the country and banked in foreign lands being repatriated. But no one knows for sure how much of the stolen fortunes of this nation remain secretly stored away abroad and with no means whatsoever at this country’s disposal to relocate the impressive residencies to Zimbabwe from foreign countries as some way of recovering this country’s fortunes. Or are those impressive homes laid on by the foreign paymasters of the Zimbabwean fugitives to operate from as sell-outs in such comfort as will not make them despair in their work against their motherland? It is however to be hoped that our Government will take appropriate measures to recover what truly belongs to this country in the same way that President Mnangagwa has said he would soon initiate extradition measures with South Africa for fugitive Zimbabwean political leaders and others hiding in that country to be brought back home to face the music with just desserts handed down to those found guilty of committing an offence. But greater danger remains posed by the enemy within — opposition elements dying to be in power yesterday, as it were, but finding no through road to the citadels of power and so riding on the backs of proponents of the Zanu-PF — regime change agenda to be airlifted to their desired destination. Kow-towing with this lot in the frenzied anti-Zanu-PF government campaign are local non-governmental organisations which the Government has not identified but whose activities will hopefully soon be put under the microscope to determine compliance by those bodies with their stated missions. Social media, which should otherwise be playing commendable roles by exposing the hidden rot in our society for corrective cleansing measures to be taken, also stand accused by the Government of becoming the rot themselves by freelancing for enemies of the Zanu-PF Government and of the country. These anti-government elements dangerously take for granted the abundant freedom of expression in the country by unwittingly prostituting with this country’s detractors.