The Chronicle Another week, and there is another social media feud that involves go-to Twitter fighter Prince Kaybee, and returnee to the Twitter catfight streets, Black Coffee. The two respected DJs have had a twar in the past that resulted in lines being drawn in the sand. The rivalry between the two started when Black Coffee decided to defend friend and business partner, Euphonik, when he was being dragged by Twitter’s favourite, Koshiek Karan. Prince Kaybee had sided with Koshiek, which resulted in Black Coffee and Euphonik dragging Prince Kaybee and calling him a “house ni**a.” This resulted in the two continually having little twars, with long periods of a cold war. However, as we have come to expect from Prince Kaybee that nothing is forgotten forever. The DJ compared himself to Black Coffee to disastrous effect. First he chose to side with everyone’s not-so-favourite authority, Nhlamulo “Nota” Baloyi. Prince Kaybee took to social media to share the segment that Nota shares his beliefs on why Nasty C received the monumental deal of signing with Def Jam international, over artists like himself and Lady Zamar. He then suggested that was the reason he was “bigger” than Black Coffee, but people would not admit that fact. Black Coffee did not do much, but he did a lot. Instead of getting involved in a back and forth with Prince Kaybee over his allegations. The DJ simply posted in the comments section of the post screenshots of the number of streams that Black Coffee has on Spotify, comparing them to Prince Kaybee’s numbers on the platform. Suffice to say that the knock of reality hit the “Hosh” hit maker so hard that he deleted the tweet. But as we have come to know that the social media streets do not forget, so a follower asked for clarity on why he was being dragged. Prince Kaybee alleged that he had never suggested that he was more accomplished than Black Coffee. But what he meant to convey was that his last album “Re Mmino,” that had hit single, “Fetch Your Life,” featuring Msaki is the biggest selling house album of 2019, including having over 150 million streams to date. Prince Kaybee is still facing trolls for allegedly losing to Black Coffee again. But Black Coffee has clearly moved on to continue making money and growing his following outside of Twitter, which could be advised for Prince Kaybee too.-Zalebs.