The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
VETERAN pace bowler Christopher Mpofu has been left out of the Chevrons’ provisional squad that goes into camp in Harare tomorrow. Ainsley Ndlovu and Charlton Ndlovu, who have been training under the watchful eyes of coach Njabulo Ncube at Queens Sports Club, have also been excluded from the training squad. Zimbabwe Cricket (ZC) yesterday named a 25-member training squad as preparations for the proposed limited-overs tour of Pakistan intensifies. National team players have been training in groups in Harare and Bulawayo during the Covid-19 lockdown. This is the first time that the Chevrons have trained as a group since the Covid-19 lockdown in March. The proposed Pakistan tour, which is subject to Government approval, is set for October/November and will see the two sides facing off in three one-day international’s and as many Twenty-20 Internationals. The ODI series in Pakistan, which is part of the inaugural ICC Cricket World Cup Super League, is pencilled in for October 30 and November 1 and 3. The T20I matches are scheduled for November 7, 8 and 10. Rising cricketers in the form of ex-Under-19 stars Wesley Madhevere, Richard Ngarava, Brandon Mavuta and the uncapped Milton Shumba have been included in the provisional squad alongside limited-overs captain Chamu Chibhabha, Brendan Taylor, Craig Ervine, Sikandar Raza, Sean Williams and Elton Chigumbura. The uncapped Faraz Akram is also part of the squad, with Luke Jongwe, Peter Moor, Tendai Chisoro and Wellington Masakadza bouncing back into contention for places in the final travelling squad should the green light to travel be given. The trio of Tendai Chatara, Kyle Jarvis and Ryan Burl has fully recovered from injuries that ruled them out of Zimbabwe’s last international action earlier this year and have also been called up. ZC spokesperson Darlington Majonga said the final squad will be announced in due course. “We’re hopeful of getting clearance from the Government and now the squad comes to train together for the first time. The traveling team will be announced in due course,” said Majonga. Zimbabwe Training Squad
Faraz Akram, Ryan Burl, Regis Chakabva, Brian Chari, Tendai Chatara, Chamu Chibhabha, Elton Chigumbura, Tendai Chisoro, Craig Ervine, Kyle Jarvis, Luke Jongwe, Tinashe Kamunhukamwe, Wesley Madhevere, Timycen Maruma, Wellington Masakadza, Brandon Mavuta, Peter Moor, Carl Mumba, Richmond Mutumbami, Richard Ngarava, Sikandar Raza, Milton Shumba, Brendan Taylor, Donald Tiripano, Sean Williams