The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent 
FOR many artistes in the country faced with lack of funding in the arts, their talent has died a natural death. To some it’s a different case as fate has favoured them where there are pampered by generous individuals with resources which in turn lead to blooming careers which see them tour regionally and internationally. Among such generous people are Difference Ncube, popularly known as Difa, who hails from rural Jutshume Village down south in Bulilima District. The man has been the saviour for many artistes who hail from the Bulilima and Mangwe districts as he has helped with money, buying musical equipment and giving advice to artistes. Those who have benefitted immensely include sensational Clement Magwaza, high rising Zimbabwe Rhumba musician Mxolisi “Mr Bones” Ndlovu, Tornado Heroes, Mlambos Connection and many alike. Speaking from his United Kingdom base in Leeds, Difa narrated how globetrotting helped him realise the need to play a part in uplifting the status quo of Zimbabwean artistes. “I’m a man who’s been to a lot of corners around the world. I’ve been to countries like America, Brazil, in the Middle East and what I realised is that for our artistes to be successful we’ve a role to play as people who are part of their society. “Therefore, I took upon myself to assist artistes mostly the upcoming ones so that I can see them excel in arts. For example, there are bands where you see young folks around the age of 16, there will be having talent but can’t make it out to the cut throat industry,” said the soft spoken Difa. He said he is working with a group of young rural men who are eager to take on the music world. “The identification of talent is the case with some boys I recently met from Muke Village in Masendu in my home district, Bulilima. They are called Qaphela Music Band (Abafana Benja), I saw on a video circulating on social media. “Their immense talent was shown after there were playing using homemade instrumentals and I fell in love with those boys which later made me to take them under my wing and got them to record an album in Bulawayo which is on the works and once the lockdown restrictions are eased in Zimbabwe, the world should expect fireworks,” he said. Difa said his love for music has seen him not only fund artistes but give them advice on art and life. “What drives me to continue doing this is love for music regardless of genre. I’d love to see these artistes be great people in the future who are looked up to and have a great impact in their communities. “I also encourage them to be good people out there off the stage as my zeal is to coach them to have better characters that their fans are darling to. Precious Manyoyoba, who is now in Dubai, is there because of such integrity,” said Difa. The advice that he gives does not come from empty experience, Difa revealed that he has written music for the likes of Matshikos in the hit Ngiyekeleni Bo and the late Bhekumuzi Luthuli’s tracks namely Africa Hlanganani, Awungisize, Umlabalaba, Imali yezibizo and Kukhona engizokubona. “The type of music that I’m into is Rhumba songs. I think I didn’t realise how I ventured into arts, as I look back around 1992 that is when there was a guy called Joseph Silwane, who had his brother called Gobiqolo a former band member for Ndux Malax. They used to come at my home where we would sit down and write songs. To me it all started as a hobby. “Since then I never looked back. I’ve written seven tracks in different albums for Bhekumuzi Luthuli. Also having a friend Penwel Kunene in the Matshikos group I managed to write two songs for them after he encouraged me. The song is still liked by many. In gospel I have worked with the likes of Sibanjana Junior,” he said. Difa said he will continue to assist young musicians such as Mr Bones and Magwaza who always ask on how they can take a leaf in writing songs that have a great impact to the society. Difa said plans are underway to stage a show with Bakadzi hitmaker, Allen Ndoda, who is in England. “As we speak, Allen Ndoda is in England and it’s just that there is Covid-19. However, we are in the process of coming up with a gig where he plays here and makes his mark internationally, after a scintillating career that spans over two decades. “My thrust is also to see Radio BuKalanga get a licence from BAZ as it will open more doors for our artistes,” Difa added.- @mthabisi_mthire.