The Chronicle Stephen Mpofu
DIEHARD patriots should beware political Machiavels in their midst who play hounds by night and hares by day as they are without any doubt anathema to the revolution that freed our motherland from oppression by a racist foreign ruling culture and must continue for generations ad infinitum. These shameless so-called politicians must Nichodemously have supped with the enemy as the gallant sons and daughters of the soil bore the brunt of snakes and mosquito bites in the bush fighting to liberate our land from those without knees to bring independence and freedom to this country in 1980; otherwise how else can anyone justify their joining ranks with Western imperialists fighting ruthlessly to effect regime change as a reprisal for the Zanu-PF Government’s legitimate efforts to accelerate the revolution’s continued march through the reform programme which saw blacks being reunited with the soil stolen from them by foreigners during the colonial era? By openly and surreptitiously working with the enemies of our Government, the opposition political schemers here at home clearly hoped that if the Zanu-PF Government fell, spiked by land reform, they would themselves be installed in power by the imperialists for whom the lackeys ran errands. On the other hand, while grateful for any damaging information against Zanu-PF, the imperialists would treat the stooges as such even if the latter got into power. But, of course, the Zimbabwean political Machiavels were not, and could not, because of their low political calibre be privy to what went on in the minds of their foreign paymasters. Now it is ad infinitum and our Government is compensating those farmers who truly BELONG IN this country for improvements to farms taken from them and allocated to other indigenous Zimbabweans so that the land revolution temporarily quarantined in the Western economic embargo can proceed without further impediments to benefit future generations. But now see (yes, you) what happens in the daybreak: the hounds in point above now turned hares and running with the genuine hares, Zimbabweans who benefited from land reform. Curiosa and curiosa, or is it not? And come general elections Zimbabweans should clearly identify the sell-outs standing as candidates for ballot distancing against them as just desserts for their perfidious lifestyles. (For all that no one knows for sure, but in light of their anti-native black mentality, is it not therefore, a possibility that without land reform, some inverted indigenous farmers might have grown exotic grass for export on their vast fertile land and in the process lose guffaws as they imagined belly-sunken, bony-faced povo-crawling hither and thither, searching for food in recurrent drought years such as those that this country has experienced recently.) Now as the Government inevitably cracks down on corruption in every sector of our economy to polish the image of this country both at home and elsewhere in the global village, no whistleblower should assume interchangeable roles of both hound and hare as the case might be. Every whistleblower, be it a member of the ruling party or of the opposition, must hunt together with the powers that be to rid our nation of maggots wriggling in the obscurity of public or private sector structures. Which suggests that no-nonsense legal sanction should be introduced and made public for all to be well conversant with them so that when knowledge of punishment for an offence precedes a wrong deed it will serve as a deterrent so that not even a fool will touch red-hot ambers with bare hands while knowing fully well that fire burns. Now is certainly the time for action to supplant rhetoric by ridding our country of any rot rearing its ugly head in our mature democracy and the corrupt are such rot.