The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Former member of Zimbabwe’s talented imbube group Indosakusa: The Morning Star, Khulumani “Dlodloba” Mnkandla, has gone solo and recently dropped his debut album. The album according to Dlodloba is made up of a genre which he calls African Style which is different from the Imbube and Isicathamiya genres, which he has been part of for over a decade. His debut album is called Shwele Baba with tracks such as Ngibuyile featuring Gazelimnyama, Nomalizo, Isipho, Emathandweni, Shwele Baba, Amalobolo, Tholakele, Maskandi featuring Gazelimnyama and Nomalizo (instrumental). Dlodloba left the group on September 10 to pursue his solo career. “I left Indosakusa because I saw that I want to give my project enough time so that I can push it fully and dedicate more time to my career,” said Dlodloba. He said his brand is meant to promote vast cultures that are enmeshed in the country. “I always had a vision to sing African Style songs and the aim is to spread our culture and identity through singing and dancing as well as to stretch my wings wider with this God-given gift. This is my music project which is there to fulfil this vision of sharing our African identity and style with everyone in the world through singing and dancing. “I wish that my generation in music may go back to their roots and understand what they are so that we keep our culture alive. Even those who will come after us must find something real to learn from us,” said Dlodloba. In that light Dlodloba said he has started working on visuals for one of his songs, Shwele Baba, in the nine-track album, which is available on CDs now and also online stores like Amazon, Simfy Africa, Tick Tok, iTunes, Spotify, Play Network and Boom Play. “I’m working on doing a video for the track Shwele Baba and it will be out mid-October. The video is being shot by SaDee Lens Work and this will be my first video. “I’m targeting locations like How Mine, Queens Park at the Flyover bridge and at the fields at Nyamandlovu. This is so because the song is about people who are working daily but at the end of the day, they are getting nothing in return, a case of artistes in the country,” said Dlodloba. The Filabusi-born artiste who is inspired by Ladysmith Black Mambazo started his career in the early 2000 when he joined a group known as Ilinqe Elimnyama. In 2008, together with his friends they formed a group called iNsika yeSizwe which later folded. In 2010 he joined the Impumelelo Shining Stars which is now called Indosakusa: The Morning Star and he worked with the group till he started his own project. – Follow on Twitter @mthabisi_mthire.