The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
ARTISTES and athletes have been urged to venture into various livelihood projects which can guarantee them an alternative source of income once they have retired from their professions. Speaking in Gwanda on Tuesday during an awareness meeting on the Covid-19 relief fund for artistes and athletes Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Youth, Sports, Arts and Recreation, Thokozile Chitepo said many artistes and athletes in the country do well but die poor after retirement. She said her Ministry was concerned with addressing poverty among athletes and artists. “We’ve engaged the Ministry of Agriculture and agreed that going forward we’ve to address the problem of poverty among artistes and athletes. “Yes, they can get an income from their performances but we want to ensure that artistes venture into various livelihood projects such as piggery, chicken rearing, farming or whatever projects are there. We’ll be working with other sectors in this regard but out first partner is the Ministry of Agriculture. “Artistes and athletes need to have alternative sources of income and not only wait for the money they earn through performances. So many sports people do well in their careers but they die paupers because they would’ve not had an alternative plan. From now on we want to work with other Ministries, gone are the days of working in silos,” she said. Chitepo said Government was working on ensuring that athletes and artistes had access to infrastructure and necessary equipment. She said a budget is allocated every year towards building infrastructure. Chitepo said Government’s vision was to have infrastructure and equipment readily available in every district. She said her Ministry was also focusing on training artistes so that they can grow and become better at what they do and even become competitive on international platforms. She said the National Arts Council was going to be working hard to nurture and improve talents. Chitepo further urged athletes and artistes to fully utilise officers at provincial and district level under the Ministry and bodies that have been put in place by Government to assist them such as the National Arts Council and Sports and Recreation Commission. “These entities like the National Arts Council were created by Government to help you get organised and develop your work so that you can be better artistes and contribute to the economy. “They can also help you organise events, access funds and to strengthen your associations that you have on the ground. They also help you with linkages, marketing your products and talents and assist you in getting resources. “In this particular Government we’ve made significant efforts to make sure artistes and athletes become more integrated into our society. “Under sporting the SRC is also there to help you organise tournaments or events, organise resources among other needs that you might have. The services are there for all of you,” she said. Government released a $20 million fund towards assisting athletes and artistes that have been affected by the pandemic. Each province was allocated $2 million. — @DubeMatutu