The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
VICTORIA Falls and Lupane residents have complained about exorbitant water tariffs that have seen each household reportedly paying more than $3 000 per month on average. Residents have implored the respective local authorities and the Zimbabwe National Water Authority (Zinwa) which supplies bulk raw water to the two councils to reduce the rates. Zinwa provides bulk untreated water to all local authorities in major urban areas and towns from its vast network of dams. In Victoria Falls and Lupane, Zinwa supplies raw water to the respective councils which then treat and distribute it to residents. In Victoria Falls, residents have been complaining about high water bills which the municipality has defended saying it is paying exorbitant rates to Zinwa compared to other towns. Speaking during the 2021 budget consultation meetings in Victoria Falls recently, residents reiterated that council would improve its water affairs if it takes over rights from Zinwa. They accused Zinwa of lacking capacity and believe ceding water rights to Victoria Falls Municipality will significantly reduce water tariffs. Similar concerns have come from Lupane residents. Responding to emailed questions, Zinwa corporate communications and marketing manager Mrs Marjorie Munyonga said the cost of supplying water in Victoria Falls is high. “Tariffs for Victoria Falls are derived from the cost of operating the system that delivers water to the municipality with the major input being electricity. “It may be pertinent to mention that in Victoria Falls Zinwa supplies raw water to the municipality on a 24-hour basis which means Zinwa is also not spared the electricity peak demand tariffs,” said Mrs Munyonga. “This however does not mean that the municipality is in any manner being isolated for unfair treatment but is charged a negotiated special rate which is basically a cost recovery tariff. Zinwa and municipality negotiated and agreed on the prevailing tariff. The same scenario applies to other local authorities such as Bulawayo Citi Council in relation to the water they get from Mtshabezi Dam.” She said the water authority is committed to its mandate in Victoria Falls. A Government commission of inquiry visited Victoria Falls Municipality two years ago to assess the municipality’s preparedness to manage its own water, but the job is still being done by Zinwa. Mrs Munyonga said the issue remains a prerogative of central Government through respective line ministries. With regards to Lupane, Mrs Munyonga said Zinwa increased rates to meet operating costs. “Zinwa recently reviewed its tariffs with the principal aim of striking a delicate balance between the need to keep service delivery up and running and the need to ensure service remained affordable to citizens. “The revision of the tariffs followed recent increases in the prices of key service delivery inputs and cost drivers such as fuel, water treatment chemicals, electricity and plant spares. The tariff structure is designed in a manner that encourages efficient use of water as tariffs go up once users exceed World Health Organisation accepted household water thresholds,” she said. Lupane residents had blamed Zinwa for their water woes. “The bills are astronomically high as most households are paying $3 000 per month. As Lupane Residents Association we wish to implore Zinwa to revise their bills and allow for proper meter readings according to usage and not estimates,” said Lupane Residents Association chairman Mr Permanent Sibanda.-@ncubeleon