The Chronicle Takudzwa Chitsiga, Harare Bureau
LOCAL boxing promoters, coaches, referees and judges are crying foul after they were left out of the Covid-19 relief funds given to the Zimbabwe National Boxing and Wrestling Control Board by the Government. The Government funds are only aimed at cushioning athletes during the Covid-19 pandemic but stable owners and boxing managers feel they were supposed to be incorporated. Seasoned promoter and trainer Clyde Musonda of Deltaforce stable said they feel let down by those who are supposed to stand for them and they need at least an explanation on how the beneficiaries were selected as they are all affiliates of Zimbabwe National Boxing and Wrestling Control Board. “We survive through boxing and we are matchmakers who make the sport tick but to our surprise we are seen as non-entities. It is not me alone who is surprised by the move as most stakeholders are waiting for an explanation of the criteria used to disburse the funds. “We know the funds were disbursed but someone should have slept on duty by not representing us well. We rely on boxing and at the moment nothing is happening as the pandemic has affected everyone including us but some people side-line us. ‘We need this addressed either through the Ministry or Sports Commission as we are not happy at all,’ said Musonda. Boxing coach Simon Sangulani, said things are not well and they do not deserve such treatment as they are part of the sport and should have been considered. “We are not happy if truth be told. We are boxing coaches who are supposed to be taken into consideration but our representatives seem to be on the forefront of supressing us. “We are the ones who make the sport move on and when it comes to Government grants people who think they are in authority make some harsh decisions against us. “Everyone is struggling to make ends meet and those who we look forward to takes us for a ride like this. They say they represent us taking our 10 percent affiliation fees yet when it comes to situations like these they treat us like we do not exist,” said Sangulani. Zimbabwe National Boxing and Wrestling Control Board, executive officer Lawrence Zimbudzana, said it is their wish that they were supposed to have been taken into consideration as they are stakeholders who are also feeling the pinch. “We are grateful to have received the funds on behalf of the athletes but some key stakeholders are feeling neglected as they were not taken into consideration. “When the funds came they were said to be for athletes and there was nothing we could do but I think in future we need to inform the relevant authorities that there are some stakeholders who need to be incorporated,” said Zimbudzana. ZNBWCB were beneficiaries of the Z$10 million fund which associations were urged to apply for before July 30.