The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE alleged sexual scandal that has rocked the Zimbabwe Referees Committee has attracted Fifa’s attention, with the world football governing body calling on the victims to immediately use its confidential platform to report the abuses. Chronicle Sport last week carried damaging reports of members of the Zifa referees panel alleging illicit sexual relationships with female referees in exchange for promotion or more match day assignments. The perpetrators and victims’ names are known to Chronicle Sport. Last week Zifa also called on the victims to come forward and lodge their complaints with Zifa chief executive officer Joseph Mamutse, an employee of the association, whose principals are among the accused. In a statement to Chronicle Sport, Fifa said they are not taking the reports lightly and any persons guilty of such should face the full wrath of the law. “Fifa takes any allegation of misconduct reported to it extremely seriously. Fifa has zero-tolerance for any form of harassment and abuse in football, including abuse of power. These violations are prohibited under the Fifa Code of Ethics,” said Fifa in its statement. Fifa called on the victims to immediately report via its confidential platform so that its appropriate bodies can follow up on the matter accordingly. “Should you or any organisation or individual have any specific evidence or information about abuse or harassment in football, we kindly ask you to report this immediately via our confidential reporting platforms so that the appropriate bodies at Fifa can follow-up accordingly. Reports can be submitted through a range of platforms, including Fifa’s confidential whistle-blowing hotline BKMS, via the Fifa Integrity App or with Fifa Integrity directly by emailing integrity@fifa.org. “Fifa has and will continue to cooperate with the relevant national and international authorities on any allegation or report that is made in confidence to Fifa about abuse or misconduct in football and will bring anyone who corrupts and abuses football to justice. Fifa has also strengthened the support it provides for victims and survivors of sexual exploitation and abuse who wish to come forward as part of Fifa Ethics investigations, introducing a minimum package of care including covering the costs of local support services that may be needed such as counselling for victims,” read the Fifa statement.