The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
WOMEN have been challenged to organise themselves and support each other into decision making positions to promote their interests in the society. Their participation in the economic and political spheres has over the years been limited resulting in a few of them taking up decision making positions. According to women rights activists, this stifles women economic empowerment. Women empowerment organisation, Emthonjeni Women’s Forum (EWF) has been conducting educational meetings with women in Tsholotsho where women complained that their issues were not being promoted. EWF director Mrs Sikhathele Mathambo said in most cases the patriarchal society disregards women as they still need to obtain their husbands’ approval to take leadership positions and participate in decision making activities. Mrs Mathambo said culture, socialisation, gender roles, lack of economic means and distance to service centres are some of the issues raised by women as barriers to their participation in local governance. “Their priorities are not considered as they are insufficiently represented in budget decision making processes. Women indicated that sometimes they are not consulted and are only informed of the outcome. Where they are consulted, they lack knowledge on how to track whether their views are captured in the final budget, a situation that leads to opacity,” said Mrs Mathambo. “Women are still treated as merely dependents of men with their place being in the kitchen. They have to balance domestic duties with their political or public duties and also lack of support from their husbands, families and mothers-in-law (pseudo men) while some lack confidence due to lack of education.” Economic empowerment and education, both in school and out of school, are key in boosting self-esteem and encouraging women participation to close gender gaps. “Those who have managed to get in leadership positions also lack knowledge to represent women’s and girls’ interests. While it is undeniable that women bear the brunt of gender inequality because of patriarchy and other factors noted above, societal norms lead women to oppose women who take up leadership positions as they may be deemed to be going against expected societal norms and values,” said Mrs Mathambo. She said there is need to transform gender norms to capacitate women with knowledge and advocacy skills to promote their specific issues. Mrs Mathambo said if not addressed, the challenges will hinder women from benefitting from gender opportunities like contesting in the 2023 elections. “There is need to raise awareness on women’s constitutional rights through leadership training, deconstructing social and traditional norms that inhibit women participation in decision making processes. Women should also maximise participating in local authorities programmes and as an organisation we are worried about Tsholotsho Rural District Council which does not have female councillors hence women feel that their interests are not represented,” she said. Mrs Mathambo said taking up leadership positions will help in changing the male dominated political agenda. “That way women will have an opportunity to attend meetings, interact with officials and take part in important discussions and ensure social transformation,” she said. Women Affairs, Community and Small and Medium Enterprises Development Minister Sithembiso Nyoni, who is also African Women Leaders’ Network (AWLN) Zimbabwe chapter chairperson encouraged women to organise themselves for economic empowerment and to also venture into politics. AWLN aims to bring together African leaders from various sectors including Government, business, civil society and academia for the enhancement of women’s leadership towards the realisation of Africa’s Agenda 2063 and the Sustainable Development Goals. “I am totally behind women who seek empowerment, but it begins with us organising ourselves and creating space. Women are more than men in number and if we come together and support each other we can win at any level. “Women are afraid of politics. Educated women need to start coming into politics, I say educated because we want female ministers, chairpersons of councils and committees. Politics of entitlement is over and we now want politics of competence. We have a lot of educated and competent women and what we need is to organise ourselves. I am totally behind every woman who wants to participate in decision making and the Ministry will always support them for national development,” said the Minister. — @ncubeleon