The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
ZIMBABWE’S tourism industry is hopeful the country will be among the countries whose travel to and from South Africa will not be restricted as the neighbouring country identifies those eligible to enter its borders. South Africa President Cyril Ramaphosa announced Wednesday that borders will open for tourists and travellers starting on October 1, but travel will be restricted to and from countries that have high infection rates. He said only OR Tambo, Cape Town International and King Shaka in Durban and Beitbridge Border post will open. The Southern African country whose economy is key to the region, will publish a list of eligible countries based on scientific data, President Ramaphosa said. The Beitbridge border post is the busiest inland port of entry in sub-Saharan Africa while OR Tambo International Airport is also the hub for air travel both in the region and international market. Some airlines into Sadc, Zimbabwe included, pass through OR Tambo and Cape Town International before connecting to their destinations. As such most tourists coming to Zimbabwe come via South Africa through OR Tambo. Some fly into South Africa and connect by road to Zimbabwe through Beitbridge for tourism activities. In an interview, Hospitality Association of Zimbabwe (HAZ) vice chairman Mr Farai Chimba said the industry is excited by the re-opening of South Africa’s tourism as this brings hope to the industry and sets the tone for the region. While a majority of tourism and hospitality facilities are now open following Government decision to re-open the sector, there have been no clients owing to travel restrictions. “This is a very positive development. South Africa is pivotal in long haul travel and also completes the East Africa connection for Kenyan Airways, which would have been difficult to open without South Africa opening up,” said Mr Chimba. Kenyan Airways, also known as KQ debuted the Nairobi, Victoria Falls and Cape Town route in 2017 and was flying three times a week before suspending flights as a result of Covid-19 pandemic induced lockdowns. Nations are re-opening the tourism industry at a time when the peak season is coming to an end, leaving countries pinning hopes on domestic and then regional tourism. Mr Chimba said hopes are high that South Africa will give the nod to travel to and from Zimbabwe. “We must, however, be cognisant that these developments come at a time when our peak season is at its tail end and travel has always been subdued for international travel hence the need to make domestic and regional travel more attractive for citizens. We are waiting to see which countries will be included as South Africa opens,” he said. Mr Chimba’s sentiments were shared by Tourism Business Council of Zimbabwe (TBCZ) president Ms Winnie Muchanyuka who is also South African Airlines country manager for Zimbabwe, who said re-opening of OR Tambo will facilitate resumption of flights by several airlines as it is a significant transfer hub for the Sadc region. She reiterated that Zimbabwe industry was excited by the developments and hopes to be among those who will be allowed entry into South Africa. Lately, new Covid-19 cases have decreased to double digits in Zimbabwe, with cumulative total now at 7 598 yesterday. What could be a challenge for the Zimbabwe tourism industry is that most countries in its tourism source market such as United States, Germany, France and Britain among others are still locked down. — @ncubeleon