The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
About two months after decamping due to spiking Covid-19 cases in Harare and Bulawayo, the Zimbabwe senior national cricket team yesterday resumed training in preparation for what could be the final tour of the year against Pakistan. The rise in Covid-19 cases in July forced Zimbabwe Cricket (ZC) to cease all training programmes for the national team that had been preparing for the incoming tour by Afghanistan. When ZC sent players home in July, they gave them training programmes to follow at home to keep fit. ZC has been working round the clock planning on salvaging its international year with a trip to Pakistan following the cancellation of last month’s proposed tour by Afghanistan due to additional measures put in place by the Government to curb the spread of Covid-19. Government, through the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC) raised a red flag against the tour by Afghanistan that had been set for July and last month after a sudden spike in Covid-19 cases. Now ZC is hoping the Government will allow the Chevrons to travel to Pakistan for what would be their last event of the year. Cricket is one of the sports given the green light to resume training during the Covid-19 lockdown. As per the International Cricket Council guidelines, the use of saliva on cricket balls was prohibited and all players as well as ZC employees have been provided with face masks and sanitisers for training sessions. Tuskers manager Nicholas Singo yesterday confirmed that Bulawayo-based national team players have resumed training at Queens Sports Club under the guidance of coach Njabulo Ncube with the help of former Chevrons player Mbekezeli Mabuza. “There are about six national team players that started training here at Queens Sports Club today. We’ve added Mbekezeli Mabuza to assist Njabulo Ncube and this is an exciting development. They’ll continue training in the safe environment while waiting to hear from head office,” said Singo. Before resuming training at the beginning of June following a lengthy suspension of sporting activities, ZC organised for all the 37 shortlisted cricketers as well as coaching staff to undergo Covid-19 tests. It then split the training pool into small sub-groups to train in their home provinces. The players focused on strength and conditioning sessions for the first three weeks before switching to skills training. After the failed tour by Afghanistan, competition for slots in the final squad for the Pakistan tour will be stiff. It hasn’t been a good period for ZC, which had a bright start to the year that began with a home Test series against Sri Lanka followed by a full tour of Bangladesh. The planned home series against Ireland scheduled for March-April was postponed due to the Covid-19 lockdown. Three ODIs against Australia in June, three ODIs against India and Netherlands at home were also cancelled. Had these series gone ahead, 2020 would have been a busy year for Zimbabwe cricket after the Chevrons failed to qualify for the T20 World Cup, which has since been postponed.
Zimbabwe is also not part of the World Test Championship. Zimbabwe training squad
Brian Chari, Christopher Mpofu, Ainsley Ndlovu, Charlton Tshuma, Sean Williams, Faraz Akram, Ryan Burl, Sikandar Raza, Chamunorwa Chibhabha, Elton Chigumbura, Craig Ervine, Kyle Jarvis, Tinashe Kamunhukamwe, Neville Madziva, William Mashinge, Peter Joseph Moor, Brian Mudzinganyama, Ryan Murray, Brendan Taylor, Regis Chakabva, Luke Jongwe, Wessly Madhevere, Timycen Maruma, Wellington Masakadza, Prince Masvaure, Tapiwa Mufudza, Tinotenda Mutombodzi, Richmond Mutumbami, Richard Ngarava, Victor Nyauchi, Brandon Mavuta, Carl Mumba, Tendai Chisoro, Tendai Chatara, Kevin Kasuza, Donald Tiripano. – @ZililoR.