The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo I sometimes find dressing up a chore. In between my 8 to 5 job, dancing to Master KG’s Jerusalema with Khaya and running errands for my side hustle – it can be a lot! I don’t always have the time to think elaborately about what to wear. Often, it’s what catches my eyes’ attention first that gets lucky to get out of the wardrobe. Of course I’m not always in a rush to leave the house but on days that I am, my basics always save the day. Dark wash denims, a white shirt (or T-shirt), dark coloured blazer, Chucks, little black dress, trendy scarf, metallic shoes, black pencil skirt. All these pieces can be rotated to make many different outfits. That’s the beauty of having good basics, you never have to stress over what to wear. I tell anyone who’s trying to do a wardrobe make-over to get the basics right. For example, if you’re going to buy a pair a shoes, get something you can wear with more than one outfit. Don’t get yellow shoes if you know it’s the only good pair you’ll have. Same applies to blazers. Navy blue, black, grey are your go to pieces. Why get army green if you know you won’t get value from it. My thinking is – you don’t want to look like you’re wearing the same things over and over again. It’s easy to call out a yellow or red shirt but with white, I could own 10 of them for all you care! Black is also a safe option, always. It pretty much matches with everything even on days you don’t really want to look ordinary. You really have got to be out of your mind to mess up any black fashion piece! Black neutralises any over the top combinations. It will break outfits that are too colourful and help tie everything together nicely. If you don’t already own a black blazer, top, pants and shoes – you need to get to stepping and hook yourself up! Black is also a great colour to wear on its own; all black everything is elegant. I think it’s super classy although my mother always insists I need something to break the black lest I look like a grieving widow. There are a couple of things to remember if you’re going to go for the black on black look though. Vary the fabrics and textures. Nothing looks dowdier than an all-black outfit that is all cotton. On the fabric note, make sure the fabric selection is season appropriate. A black wool dress will look fabulous in winter but out of place during summer. Silk and linen make it easier to pull off the all-black look during the warmer months. When putting together an all-black ensemble, fit becomes even more important. Take advantage of the fact that black is slimming and have the clothes more fitted and flattering, rather than shapeless and drab. Accessories are a thing for me if I’m going to do black on black. Black is such a graceful colour which allows your accessories to pop and your face to glow. It’s always a good idea to add interest with accessories. Bold, colourful jewellery or something understated in silver or gold become the statement piece of your outfit. For me, coloured stiletto heels are the go-to shoe with any all black outfit. It’s also key to make your outfit more dressy or casual with the simple change of lipstick colour. A little black dress can go from day with a light pink lip stain to night with a bold, deep red lip seamlessly. Once you invest in good blacks, you’ll realise you won’t have to spend much whenever you have an important event to attend. Just play around with your accessories and you’re good to go. Until next week, flaunt your pattern and style and don’t forget to catch up with me on Twitter handle @PatternStyleZw or WhatsApp +263774492700.