The Chronicle Nkosilathi Sibanda, Showbiz Correspondent
BOTH are stage snatchers. It is either they keep one on his feet or glued to the edge of the seat, appreciating the talent they have with the mic. This is an apt description of Bulawayo’s rising artistes Tebza and Charles Banda who is also known as Mahlaba on stage. The 14-year-old Tebza and Mahlaba are working on a music project and the studio collaboration is said to be coming off Mahlaba’s upcoming 10-track album. What excites the local music scene is that the two musicians decided to record together at a time when their works are the talk of town. Teenage sensation, Tebza is an urban contemporary high-tempo Kwaito/ Gqom entertainer while Mahlaba is into soft ballad, Rhythm and Blues. Such a duet from different types of musicians is rare. In an interview, Mahlaba said he realised the rare talent of young Tebza and pushed for an opportunity to record with him. “Tebza has an amazing talent. I didn’t want to miss that chance of singing with him. A track if not two are coming out soon,” said Mahlaba. He said the music project is on the decks of Elephant Herd Records producer Goodwin “Smallz” Ndlovu. “What we are working on is something fresh. We have not come up with a title for the track. It is an expression of how culture has changed from the days of our ancestors to now,” said Mahlaba. The Ubuhle bakho hitmaker said working with Tebza has revived his creativity. “Working with a young musician of his character has taught me so many things. It brings back that imagination we all need. “It also confirms that music has no boundaries as musicians from different genres can collaborate and produce the best works. The message is to respect and appreciate each other in the arts industry,” said Mahlaba. Tebza, whose real name is Tebogo Moyo said he is honoured to work with Mahlaba. “It is an honour. I am sure music lovers in the city and beyond are going to love the track that we are working on. Expect the unexpected,” said the Milton High School pupil. The young muso, popular with his Waz’ khothi lihlo and As’phel’Moya, hits has had a footprint already by performing at Intwasa Arts Festival and at the Roil Bulawayo Arts Awards ceremony. Tebza and Mahlaba said they are planning to stage a massive show when Covid-19 restrictions are relaxed.