The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
JAMACIAN recording artiste Tall Rich has said he is looking forward to collaborations with Zimbabwean artistes and also make his debut show appearance in the country. Tall Rich is a name many have heard on radio worldwide, including Bulawayo’s own Skyz Metro FM. The artiste who is working on his second album titled Hakuna Vita, which means no war in Swahili and is set to be released next year in August, said he is a fanatic of the country because of its love and immense talent. Speaking from his base in Kingston, Jamaica, Tall Rich (real name Eric Hamilton) through manager Agent Madting, said he would like to rub shoulders in the studio with artistes among them Sadza neMuriwo hitmaker Jah Prayzah and Winky D. “My wish is to perform in Zimbabwe and get to appreciate physically the love and talent that is found in the African country and I hope that when the lockdown is eased, I’ll be able to make my debut appearance. “It will also be a pleasure to work with the artistes of the likes of Jah Prayzah, Souljah Love, Winky D, Killer Tee, you name them, the list is just so endless,” he said. His upcoming album is set to have 20 tracks with a message of love, unity and growth. “I have started to work on my album that is set to be released on August 18 in 2021 and it carries with its messages that bring about humanity in a society. If I’m to get a collaboration with any Zimbabwean artiste, definitely it will be added on the album. “The tracks are namely Racial Situation, Give I Wings, Fight mi down, Going far, Everywhere I go, Vampyahs, No war, Ms Uganda, Uplifter Tribute, Nuh call dem duh remix, Run, Legalize Ganjah, What kinda life, Time after time, Chain Linked, We’re not free, Microchip, Genuine Love, Tell mi Why and A murder,” said Tall Rich. The 50-year-old world-acclaimed musician has always had music around him growing up, as his grandmother was a person who sang at wakes. Another strong influence came from his uncle who is known in the music industry as Uplifter. Uplifter was a powerful and inspiring singer, who through his Rastafarian culture spread his knowledge and teachings of Rastafari Livity through music. Tall Rich grew up around singers like Everton Blender, Sluggie Ranks, Trevor Sparks, Frankie Paul and Chuck Fender and has performed live stage performances with artistes that include Beres Hammond, Judy Mowatt, Maxi Priest, Sly and Robbie, Cherie Anderson to name but a few.- @mthabisi_mthire.