The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
ZIMBABWE visual artiste George Masarira is up for a prestigious award Emerging Painting Invitational (EPI) pitting himself against 16 other artistes from Africa. Masarira who works out of Studio 6 at the National Gallery of Zimbabwe in Bulawayo, is among 17 finalists from eight African countries. He is also nominated with fellow Zimbabwean Tashinga Majiri. Due to travel restrictions across Africa, the 2020 edition will be taking place from October 12 to 19 as an online exhibition. There will be a programme of online talks, virtual studio visits and interactions in collaboration with the first prize sponsor Strauss & Co – South Africa’s leading art auction house. EPI winners will be announced on October 19 with prizes including cash, residencies and exhibitions. Three of the finalists will be awarded US$6000, with the top prize winner also receiving US$3000 sponsored by Strauss & Co. Masarira said he was honoured to have made it as a finalist for the awards. “As a young artiste from Bulawayo, Zimbabwe I feel honoured to be recognised on the continent. This gives me the drive to work hard and to achieve more through my art. It’s not about winning, which of course will be a great thing, but the recognition itself is great for me,” said Masarira. He said the nomination was good for his brand as an artiste revealing that he did not know how his work got to the platform. “For my brand, it shows that I should stay on that path. Getting such nominations is always a plus for any artiste as it adds to the feathers in my cap,” said Masarira. Describing himself and his art, Masarira said the contemporary range influences and inspires most of his works. “I’m mainly inspired by the contemporary unfolding around me encompassing politics, economic, religion, environment and anything that involves cosmopolitan philosophy surrounding me. I’m, a provoking artiste as most of my work describes what I feel to be the truth. I can be summarised as radical,” said Masarira. In last year’s edition, Zimbabwean Epheas Maposa came second in the same competition while Amanda Mushate made it to the top eight. The first prize went to Nelly Guambe from Mozambique. The Mzilikazi Arts and Craft Centre product, Masarira last year scooped the Roil Bulawayo Arts Award in the Outstanding Visual Artiste 2-Dimensional category. Born in Gokwe, Masarira was nominated for the artwork Inkululeko/Freedom which questions why Africa is said to be rich but some people are languishing in abject poverty. – Follow on Twitter @bonganinkunzi