The Chronicle Bonang Matheba has reportedly lost her jewellery that is worth R100 000 in the last month. It is alleged to have been stolen, this according to Daily Sun. The larger than life businesswoman moved from her house from July till August. During that period, she noticed that her diamond-encrusted bracelet had gone missing and possibly stolen. According to the publication, Bonang opened a case at the Sandton police station, and the spokesperson captain Mavela Masondo had confirmed that a case of theft was opened, however, there have been no arrests yet. When Bonang was contacted by Daily Sun she refused to comment explaining that it is a personal matter. The moving company that was hired to move all her stuff, Pickfords, was not aware that an expensive item was missing. Her insurance company also was not alerted. In this year alone, a few ZAlebs has had their pricey items stolen. From Nomzamo Mbatha whose Rolex was stolen to Thuli Phongolo, whose iPhone was also stolen. Nomzamo Mbatha’s Rolex was worth more than R200 000. According to Nomzamo’s statement that she wrote at a police station, she said she swiftly inquired with the cleaners and assistant but it seems they couldn’t be of help. The Sunset Towers Body Corporate distanced themselves from the incident and further stated that the whole saga is between Nomzamo and the owner of the unit. The unfortunate incident took place in November 2019, at Sunset Towers, Sandton. The police further discovered that Nomzamo Mbatha’s watch wasn’t insured. Thuli Phongolo’s R28 000 iPhone was stolen when she was having lunch out with a friend. The unfortunate incident happened at Rivonia Salsa’s Village restaurant in Sandton. The actress was apparently enjoying a day out with a friend when an unknown man snatched her phone whilst texting a friend. The man got into a car and absconded with her exorbitant cellphone. Thuli opened a case but no one has since been arrested. DJ Maphorisa also suffered a loss of one of his items, his Gucci doek. It apparently was stolen by his friend musician Daniel Marvin. In a hilarious video posted by a Tweep, Daniel Marven, he reveals to have stolen the headscarf. In the video, Daniel explains that he took the headscarf so that South Africans can finally see what DJ Maphorisa is hiding underneath the headscarf. Another reason that Daniel alleges he took the headscarf was because the colour was fading as Maphorisa did everything, including showering, with it on. The self-proclaimed amapiano pioneer, took the theft in good humour sharing the video on his timeline with laughing emojis.-Zalebs