The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
AFTER they started singing six years ago, Victoria Falls High School twins Nkosilathi and Nkosenhle Ncube, whose stage name is Top Kings, have never looked back. The twins who are doing Form Five at Mosi-oa-Tunya High School, have so far released a number of singles. They said they are grateful to their school head Mr Roland Sibanda who has been assisting them both academically and in their music career. They have nicknamed themselves Mr Culture and Mr Africa as they want to fuse African culture in their music. The twins said the closure of schools due to the Covid-19-induced lockdown, gave them time to focus on their music. They recently released a singles collection of nine songs which they hope to launch this Friday at Breeze FM, a local radio station. Still basking in the success of last year’s hit single Amakhekhekhe whose video went viral on YouTube and Instagram, the Top Kings said they hope to wow fans with their single Umama Wengane which features Madlela Skhobokhobo and UMellisa. The other singles are Mbambeni, Ngisakhula Mina, Umama Kamthandi, Lingabehlukanisi, Simncitshile Umuntu, I promised to love and Yibo Labana. The boys however, said the major challenge they are facing is lack of financial support. “We wish to get a sponsor who can help us realise our dream. We haven’t benefited from our music yet but what is comforting is that we are slowly getting known in the music industry. We have tried to balance school work and music and once we have the required resources, we will engage a manager to assist us. We want to go professional soon after completing our A-level,” said Nkosenhle. The musicians said they want to do a video with Madlela on the song Umama Wengane, which borders around issues of domestic violence. Chuchu Man of Danica Studios and DJ Ace Kater produced all the singles for the twins. “We started with Ndebele dancehall music and DJ Ace Kater advised us to be unique and craft our own genre to get quick recognition. That’s how the song Amakhekhekhe came about last year and it was very popular,” said Nkosilathi. Other songs by Top Kings include Umuntu onyama umnyama lengqondo, Ngabe Ngifuna Wena and Ukufa Kuyabuya which they recorded at Oskid Productions. The twins said they looked forward to working with seasoned musicians such as Jah Prayzah, DJ Tira and Master KG among others. – Follow on Twitter @ncubeleon.