The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube and Bongani Ndlovu
The future of traditional gospel music is certainly bright if a new album by a truck driver, Abednico Sikhosana is anything to go by. The eight-track album titled Umkhuleko was released last month and has some songs which contain hope-inspiring short sermons that will definitely spiritually uplift many. The album generally has powerful biblical messages. Twenty-eight-year-old Sikhosana who hails from Gulathi Village in Matobo said he has always been passionate about music although he spends most of his time on the highway delivering goods. “I grew up singing traditional music and in 2017, I joined the gospel group, Harmony Sounds which is very popular in the SDA church. Thereafter, I went solo and released my own album in 2019 titled Uthandolwenkosi.” For Sikhosana’s latest album, he called on the services of renowned keyboard player Velaphi “VG” Gumbo on the instrumentals. VG also featured in some of the songs. The title track, Umkhuleko speaks about the power of prayer and urges Christians to never stop praying. In the song Bonga, Sikhosana urges people to be grateful to God for what He does for them in their lives, while in Udliwa Yini, the musician asks people to confess their sins rather than keeping them a secret. Other tracks are Umuntu, Izwe Elihle, Impilo, Amandla kaThixo and Usuku Lwenkosi, a track which urges people to take note of the signs pointing to the Lord’s second coming. Traditional Gospel music has been popularised by musicians like the late Brian Sibalo, the late Rivonia Khumalo and the now, South Africa-based Ernest Masongela. This genre tends to be a bit laid back with more emphasis on the message, than instruments. The musician said like any up-and-coming musician, getting started has not been easy as financing recordings is a big challenge. “Recording studios are expensive. Producing CDs and getting instruments are some of the hindrances I faced. However, I’m grateful to Gumbo and my backing vocalists for assisting me in this production,” Sikhosana said. He said he is using social media to market and sell his album. “The music is available on iTunes and I’m working on getting distribution areas for the CDs,” said the musician. — @themkhust/@bonganiinkunzi.