The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau The ZRP has intensified patrols at illegal crossing points close to the border where the smuggling of people and goods had become rampant in the last few weeks. The common places which were being used by criminals to access Zimbabwe and South Africa illegally include the Spillway which is located 500 mitres east of Beitbridge Border Post and Dulivhadzimu Gorge (located 3km west of the port of entry). In addition, the criminals mainly those people smuggling goods among them groceries and flea market wares were using these two points. Some Zimbabweans coming from South Africa were also using the two points to avoid mandatory quarantine, with the police arresting between 20 and 30 people at these points daily. The Chronicle also understands that the police have managed close down an illegal taxi rank which had been opened by criminals near the DA’s Camp in the eastern part of Beitbridge town. The police officer commanding Beitbridge, Chief Superintendent Tichaona Nyongo yesterday said they had impounded eight vehicles from the illegal tax rank. “Patrols are in full swing we are not living any stone unturned and we want to strongly warn those involved in criminal activities along the border that the long arm of the law will catch up with them,” he said. The senior police officer said they had recovered a number of items that were being smuggled into the country via the Spillway and Dulivhadzimu Gorge. Among some of the recently recovered goods, he said were 1 110 litres of petrol, several bales of clothes and an assortment of groceries and electrical gadgets. “We have deployed enough manpower to deal with criminal activities along the border. “Our efforts are paying dividends and we have managed to close down most of the undesignated entry and exit points and a taxi rank on the eastern part of the town,” said Chief Supt Nyongo. Zimbabwean and South African security have since the start of the lockdown in March intensified patrols to minimize the illegal movement of both people and goods. This was done to reduce the rate of the spread of the novel corona virus pandemic in the two neighbouring countries. The South Africans are intercepting mainly cigarettes, while the ZRP is arresting people with an assortment groceries and electrical gadgets. Presently the border is closed to non-essential human traffic and the development has led to an upsurge in smuggling and border jumping cases.