The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
LAST week Zifa announced that its technical directorate will review the academy system to get rid of individuals and groups that feign professional commitment and resources to set up professional academies in line with Fifa standards. A cocktail of new requirements before an academy is registered were announced as the national association moves to bring sanity in junior football. Besides the administrative issues which must be adhered to, Zifa announced that academies must now have the right size football pitches and soccer balls. Previously youngsters as young as 10 years found themselves playing in a full size pitch meant for adults, while they used size 4 balls. It’s hard for a youngster to receive and grasp all technical and tactical skills under those conditions, let alone playing 11 vs 11. The new stance by Zifa must be applauded and embraced as a matter of urgency by schools through their technical arms such as the National Association of Primary School Heads (Naph) and National Association of Secondary School Heads (Nash). There are a number of football tournaments at primary and secondary school level, but most of them are held at White City Stadium or even Barbourfields Stadium. Surely a 12-year-old can’t be expected to run the width and breath of a pitch as big as White City Stadium. These youngsters must play their games at specially created pitches with the right size goalposts that will allow goalkeepers to fully showcase their talents. Ball control tactic is also very easy to learn on the right standard age group pitch. Schools need to redesign their playing fields and even change the playing format for junior age groups. Zifa must also engage the Naph and Nash leadership to come up with a working document for the new set up in terms of junior football in line with what both Zifa and Fifa want. For a long time, schools’ football has largely been an “abuse” of youngsters, since it has continuously been played under extremely uncomfortable standards for them. In countries where academies are well run, the 11 vs 11 playing format is for children above the age of 12 years. Those above 10 years, but below 12 use the 9 vs 9 system and more crucially do not play in a Standard A pitch. To enforce the new way of doing things, Zifa must also consider outlawing school competitions for junior teams that are not held in right size pitches. Even the balls used must be of the right size for each particular age group.