The Chronicle In Spoiler Problems in Peace Processes, Stephen Stedman states: “Peace processes create spoilers . . . Spoilers exist only when there is a peace process to undermine.” He defines spoilers as “leaders and parties who believe the emerging peace threatens their power, world view, and interests.” Although his spoiler typology, related to peace processes, Stedman probably had characters of the mould of US Ambassador to Zimbabwe Mr Brian Nichols in mind. Mr Nichols has mastered the art of spoiling the re-engagement of Zimbabwe and the US. His latest diplomatic gaffe, a blatant attack on Zimbabwe in an interview with The Sunday Times of South Africa, forced the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade to put pen to paper. In a statement on Monday, the ministry said the US Ambassador has a responsibility to carry out his legitimate functions without unduly attacking the Zimbabwean Government. Government also expressed utter dismay following the unwarranted comments in which Mr Nichols continues to attack the country’s political and economic programmes in clear violation of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. Mr Nichols claimed that Zimbabwe was in political turmoil in an interview with the anti-Zimbabwean newspaper, misinforming the world about what is obtaining in the country. He also alleged that there was gross violation of human rights in Zimbabwe without substantiating his claims, as usual. As we reported yesterday, the Ministry told Mr Nichols to immediately cease any actions which are likely to further harm relations between Zimbabwe and the US, and also a flagrant violation of protocol, etiquette and the basic tenets of the Vienna Convention. “The Zimbabwe Government, once again, expresses its utter dismay at the actions by the United States Ambassador Mr Brian Nichols in continuing to make disparaging public comments and attacks on the Zimbabwe Government’s political and economic programmes. This is in clear violation of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, which governs the rules for the exchange and treatment of Envoys between States, as well as their behaviour,” said the Ministry. Unfortunately, Government’s warning will fall on the deaf ears of a spoiler whose favourite pastime is to demonise Zimbabwe. When he is not demonising, Mr Nichols is very busy coordinating the fake abductions of opposition MDC spoilers. The emerging peace and development in Zimbabwe following the peaceful transition that led to the birth of the Second Republic led by President Mnangagwa in November 2017, threatens Mr Nichols’ “power, world view, and interests”. President Mnangagwa’s first inauguration speech, in particular, is a threat to the narrow and selfish interests of Mr Nichols and his fellow spoilers. This is the speech that was used by President Mnangagwa to outline the re-engagement thrust that would focus on countries like the United States of America, Great Britain, European Union member states and other Western nations. He also set out a rapprochement thrust that would cover international organisations, mainly the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank (WB). He also used the same speech to promise a raft of reforms in enhancing democratic space, citizen participation and the upholding of civil liberties. President Mnangagwa has delivered on all his promises. That is why Mr Nichols alleges gross violation of human rights in Zimbabwe without substantiating his claims. He is a spoiler, that is what spoilers do — they undermine.