The Chronicle Showbiz Correspondent
AT the age of 83, most people will be winding down their twilight years being the loving and caring grandfather, but not for Donatus Crown Gqoka Moyo. This is the opportune time for him to pursue his lifelong dream of being a recording artiste after over 40 years as a teacher around Zimbabwe. Using the stage name Mr DC Gqoka, he was born on May 25 1937, in Mawaza area of Gwanda, and is married to Florence Mpofu. The couple has seven children, namely Gaither, Velani, Quincy, Mgcini, Beauty, Andile and Gugulethu. This year during lockdown, Mr DC Gqoka was busy recording an album named Ezakithi. It has six tracks Country Boy, Sitting by The Well, Salt of the Earth, Criminals, I Think and Song of Sixes Pence. It has been a life long dream of his to record an album that would speak to people. “This album is one that I wrote after seeing people in life and what they do. It’s about life in general. Like criminals I’ve seen people doing wrong in life and being arrested. This is because I saw it fit that I should write such a song,” said Mr DC Gqoka. He believes that singing is in his blood as his grandfather James Khahlu used to play in a band called Black and White Los Angeles Orchestra in Bulawayo. Khahlu’s daughter Sarah Ndlovu was Mr DC Gqoka’s mother, who used to sing and lead the school where she taught at in singing hymns. “At home we used to sing all the time. It was a great experience. We loved singing as a family, those were great memories,” said Mr DC Gqoka. Due to the busy life of him being a dedicated teacher from the 1950s, Mr DC Gqoka said he did not get time to pursue fully his calling. “I didn’t get the chance to record an album earlier on as I used to teach in the rural areas. You know in the rural areas you don’t get the same chances as those who live in the cities. I spent over 40 years in the rural areas. I taught at Kana Mission, Ngezi Mission, Phakame Mission, Lubuze Mission and all this time I was leading the schools in singing something that I’m passionate about,” said Mr DC Gqoka. At the ripe age of 83, it was after his daughter Quincy who did backing vocals, who is a singer in her own right and her sibling Gaither helped him record his album this year. They made the whole process smooth using the KOD Studios and Velaphi Moyo as the producer. “It was easy because my child Quincy was the one who helped out a lot. She has recorded music before. As I can’t move about here and there because of my old age, they organised that a studio come to my house in Cowdray Park. One of my children Gaither sponsored me with money so to pay those who would record me,” said Mr DC Gqoka. Now he enjoys quality time with his grandchildren as they pop his CD when they visit him. “My grandchildren enjoy that I’ve recorded my album. They play the music at their home and they singing to my music. they don’t have a favourite they love them all. When they come to my house, they play my music,” said Mr DC Gqoka. His wife, said Mr DC Gqoka is a loving man both to her and their children. The album is available as from today from his children. To have a listen the album is on Mr DC Gqoka’s YouTube page DC Gqoka.