The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Clothing label, Freshmap is slowly making inroads in the country as local personalities are being spotted donning the apparel. The fast-rising brand which is owned by Zimbabwean Bhekinkosi “Bhaker Golide” Tshuma has been donned by South Africa-based Zinjaziyaluma, Khuzani Ndlovu and Unity from Achuzi. Rhumba musician, Madlela Skhobokhobo has also been rocking Freshmap apparel, mostly their trendy overalls which he has since gotten personalised. So good is the apparel that Madlela is seriously considering ditching his trademark stage outfit of a formal look to take up the Freshmap overall. In fact, it seems like it is already a done deal because for the past month or so, Madlela has been appearing in Freshmap regalia. Freshmap’s range of clothing includes trendy overalls, tracksuits, jackets, caps, hats, T-shirts, formal and traditional wear with a new range of masks being introduced recently. Speaking from his base in Johannesburg, Bhaker Golide said due to the reaction from locals who have shown interest in their brand, they have established a local online shopping platform through an agent who is based in Beitbridge. Trading online, has also been facilitated due to the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic which has made it difficult for people to physically trade. “The pandemic has created a scenario where the online space is of paramount importance in growing the fashion world. We’ve set up an online shop which is being run by Blessing Mbedzi, one of our agent’s based in Beitbridge. “The Zimbabwe online shop adds to those that I’m already running in Johannesburg, Limpopo and KZN as well as Botswana, Mozambique and Malawi,” Bhaker Golide said. The fashion designer however said he is working on setting up physical shops in Bulawayo and Harare for the convenience of locals, who are yet to grasp the concept of shopping online. He said he is impressed with the growth of the label as his focus is on growing the local fashion industry and creating employment. “Creating the Freshmap brand hasn’t been child’s play however, because I built it without having studied anything related to fashion. So it required hard work and determination. But, I can safely say that after having lost my job as a chef, I’m content with the progress I’ve made as the label is growing. “I’m grateful to my brother, Norman Tshuma who is also in the fashion industry as he guided me and helped establish the brand,” Bhaker Golide said, originally from Lupane. Bhaker Golide said feedback, both negative and positive, from his clientele has kept him on track as he constantly evolves with the aim of creating world-class designs. Interesting, the face of the brand is Bhaker Golide’s son Owethu. The little fellow has won the hearts of many each time he has been posted on social media clad in his dad’s apparel. – @mthabisi_mthire.