The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
THE Ministry of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation is in the process of reviving the Arts Development Fund which is meant to offer financial assistance to creatives, cultural practitioners and entrepreneurs. The fund was abandoned about 20 years ago. It will assist artistes in acquiring resources and materials and also support emerging artists. Speaking in Gwanda on Tuesday during an awareness meeting on the Covid-19 relief fund for artists and athletes, Permanent Secretary in the Ministry Thokozile Chitepo said they were in the final stages of launching the Arts Development Fund which will be announced soon. “As the Ministry of Youth, Sports, Arts and Recreation we’ll soon be launching the Arts Development Fund. This is a fund that’ll be available for creative and cultural practitioners and entrepreneurs. The fund had been previously available and was managed by the National Arts Council but it hasn’t been functional for the past 20 years due to challenges in funding. “We realised that by not having a fund in place the artistes have suffered. The funds were able to assist artistes to participate in competitions, acquire a few materials, pay rentals for places they need to hire, hire equipment which was helpful in supporting entrepreneurial artistes. This fund will soon be launched and the public will be informed about it. We expect that this will generate a lot more growth in the industry and support emerging artistes and in-process grow the industry,” she said. Dr Chitepo urged artistes to fully utilise this fund once it was available. She raised concern over the slow uptake of the Covid-19 relief fund by artists and athletes in Matabeleland South Province. Government released a $20 million fund towards assisting athletes and artists that have been affected by the pandemic. Each province was allocated $2 million. In Matabeleland South Province 113 artists out of an estimated 1 500 submitted their applications while 200 athletic clubs have submitted. “This isn’t a fund to support businesses per se but it’s just relief recognising that during this prevailing Covid-19 pandemic artistes and athletes have been severely affected as most of them make their livelihoods through performances. In sports, they make their livelihoods through competing in competitions that are held at various levels. Artists and athletes across the country have started accessing these funds. “We’ve learnt that some provinces have done very well and have surpassed the amount allocated to them but in this particular province there’s still more work to be done as we haven’t received sufficient number of applications particularly from the artistes yet we know that this province is endowed with a lot of artistes in all the genres- from music to authors, dancers, singers among others. We haven’t received enough support and we are concerned and we’ve appealed to them through our local agents and Ministry to spread the word even further that they must apply for the fund,” she said. Also speaking during the same meeting, Minister of State for Matabeleland South Province, Cde Abedinico Ncube urged artistes and athletes from his province to apply for the Covid-19 relief fund as they were lagging behind. He said the fund was a sign that Government was concerned with the welfare of artistes in the country. Cde Ncube said the arts and sports industry was a source of income for a number of families and many have been affected due to the prevailing Covid-19 pandemic. Artistes who spoke during the meeting expressed their gratitude for the funds as they will go a long way in assisting them. — @DubeMatutu