The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Nearly 100 past winners of the Roil Bulawayo Arts Awards (RoilBAA) received food vouchers as part of a Covid-19 appreciation package over the weekend as the nominations for this year’s edition opened. November 28 is the date set aside for the RoilBAAs which are now in their fourth edition and people can start nominating their favourite artistes. All they have to do is to visit www.byoartsawards.org and nominate their favourite artiste(s). Covid-19 has affected the creative sector all over the world and Zimbabwean creatives have been struggling to make ends meet as the lockdown measures to curb the spread of the deadly virus have affected their livelihoods. Those most affected are women artistes, those who are disabled and veteran artistes and these are the ones which RoilBAA organisers targeted with the food vouchers from the principal sponsor United Refineries. Nkululeko Nkala, RoilBAA spokesperson said the whole process went on smoothly. “We are calling in an appreciation package for our former winners. As it is insignificant to be called a relief. We have disbursed to almost 95 percent of the local based former winners. We will continue to try and find ways as RoilBAA and our partners to make sure we serve the arts as the arts serve the awards,” said Nkala. The food vouchers were distributed as from Friday August 28 in the afternoon before the Conscious Citizenship Strategy launch concert in the evening. The concert saw Tafi Dube, Prudence Mabhena, Cool Crooners and DJs Liz and Eugy perform. Nkala said nominations and submissions opened on the August 28 and as a safety measure against the spread of Covid-19, people should nominate their favourite artistes on the RoilBAA website. “Because of Covid we want to keep it human contact free. Submissions and nominations are on our website www.byoartsawards.org,” said Nkala. The nominations close on September 18 with October 2 set aside for announcement of nominees. Voting lines open on October 9 and close on November 20, with the awards expected to be held on November 28.