The Chronicle Zimbabweans should disabuse themselves of this notion that their challenges can be resolved by outsiders. There is a very nauseating penchant of wanting to appeal for outside intervention at every turn as though Zimbabwe is not a sovereign state with all the democratic institutions to address its problems as a nation. The prophets of doom are deliberately pushing this misleading misconception in order to create a non-existent crisis to warrant the intervention of outsiders. It is unfortunate that the gullible including some Zimbabweans in the diaspora have been fooled into believing that there is indeed a crisis in Zimbabwe when there is nothing like that. It is business as usual in Zimbabwe but like the rest of the world, economic activities are constrained by the Covid-19 restrictions. There was unwarranted excitement when South African President Cyril Ramaphosa recently sent an envoy to his counterpart, President Mnangagwa. The uninformed, including clerics, were of the mistaken belief that the envoy was going to meet all and sundry and were therefore disappointed when the envoy did the right thing of just meeting President Mnangagwa. These purveyors of lies had prepared themselves to feed the envoy with falsehoods in their pursuit to tarnish the leadership and state institutions hence their disappointment. It is time we realise as Zimbabweans that it is us and us only who can address our problems if any. Foreigners have enough problems of their own to attend to and the earlier we understand this, the better for us as citizens. We have established institutions and the Second Republic has created many platforms to enable citizens to engage so let us fully utilise these platforms to address our problems. The Government has an open door policy so we don’t need a an outsider to engage our own Government. Zimbabweans should therefore not be hoodwinked by individuals with a political agenda who are desperate for intervention of foreigners into the affairs of our country. These individuals are peddling falsehoods through social media hoping to attract the attention of the international community. The same people are now spending more hours on social media denigrating their own country and leadership instead of using the time productively. They are abusing the social media to create a non -existent crisis in the country. The truth on the ground is that the situation has greatly improved since the coming in of the Second Republic. The thrust now should be on turning around the economy and avoid being detracted by agents of regime change who are abusing the social media to incite people to engage in violent demonstrations. President Mnangagwa at the weekend assured the nation that the country will remain peaceful regardless of the hired social media fighters who are peddling falsehoods on the plight of Zimbabweans and the political situation in the country.