The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
BUDDING Bulawayo-based female pugilist Manlyn Princess Munkuli has been keeping fit during the Covid-19 lockdown by conducting backyard boxing training lessons at her Njube home. The 18-year-old, who is a member of Nketa Boxing Club, charges R200 for five Saturday training sessions. What started off as a way of keeping fit and in shape, has developed into a source of income for Munkuli, who won gold for Bulawayo in the bantamweight division at last year’s edition of the Zimbabwe National Youth Games that were held in Gweru. “It’s a programme that I really didn’t plan actually. My Pastor Witness was the first person I trained. So I thought since it was generating a little income, why not train more interested people. I love boxing and I love teaching people how to stay fit. That’s how I came up with the ‘Boxing Saturdays’ concepts. This (Boxing Saturdays) is meant for people who can’t train during the week. Those who don’t have time to join us for weekend classes, I train them on week days,” said Munkuli. She says she loves seeing people eager to learn boxing. Munkuli dreams of setting up her own gym in future and challenges youths to take up the sport. “They say an idle mind is the devil’s workshop and as such, I wish to see youngsters getting into boxing or any other sport. “I started this programme to get more people doing boxing and more people keeping fit. I hardly train any girls because they’re scared that boxing might get them hurt and they’re convinced it’s just for boys. I want to have more girls in the sport soon and I wish to grow my centre as well and also get all the equipment I need for it,” said Munkuli, whose classes are open to all age groups. The challenge she faces in her backyard gym is lack of equipment, which forces her to borrow hand pads, boxing gloves and punching bags. Munkuli says they observe strict health guidelines at her training sessions like sanitising equipment and participants. The pugilist can’t wait for the ban on sport to be lifted so that she returns to the ring. “I miss being in the boxing ring and having a real fight. Hopefully this Covid-19 lockdown ends soon,” said Munkuli. But how did Munkuli fall in love with boxing? “A couple of years back, Sithabile Ngwenya introduced me to the sport. I used to accompany her whenever she went for training and I ended up falling in love with boxing. I began training since then. “I used to be under Sikhulile Boxing Club. By that time, Mike Foloma was my coach. That man taught me everything I know today in boxing. He deserves a lot of credit. Last year I then joined Nketa Boxing Club where I trained under Steven Masiyambumbi,” said Munkuli. – @ZililoR