The Chronicle Joel Tsvakwi, Showbiz Correspondent
THE Natural History Museum of Zimbabwe in partnership with Rays Trust has embarked on an all-inclusive online symposium drive to promote Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) initiatives. Targeting high school and tertiary institution learners in Zimbabwe, the symposium will be conducted in the form of competitions. Funded by Unesco Regional Office of Sothern Africa (ROSA) and themed “Heritage and Sustainable Development Goals”, the symposium will have a virtual poster-making competition (competition 1) for high school learners that will be centred on Goal 8 (sustainable tourism). For tertiary students, the competition (competition 2) will be an online presentation on heritage and SDGs focusing on Goal 2 (zero hunger), Goal 6 (clean water and sanitation), Goal 8 (sustainable tourism), Goal 11 (sustainable cities), Goal 12 (responsible consumption and production) Goal 13 (climate action) and Goal 15 (terrestrial ecosystems). Natural History Museum marketing manager, Phineas Chauke, said the competitions are meant to inculcate a deeper understanding of museums in learners. “Museums have the obligation to advocate for sustainable development through some of the Sustainable Development Goals that are directly linked to the mandate, scope and direction of museums. As a build up to the above mentioned symposium event, we shall have two online competitions aimed at engaging young people in the conversation on Sustainable Development Goals. “We aim for unfettered creativity in the design of these posters so there is no limit to what participants can use. The deadline for idea submission will be September 7, 2020,” Chauke said. Asked who is eligible to participate, Chauke said: “Any Zimbabwean student enrolled in High School (Especially Bulawayo Metro Region) can send in an abstract for selection. The writers of the accepted abstracts will receive some reasonable guidance and guidelines on the requirements.” The posters, Chauke said, are meant to create awareness of the SDGs to the online community.