The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Known for his hilarious twist to real-life situations, Zimdancehall chanter Chipman is inspired by two legendary late musicians, Marko Sibanda and Paul Matavire. The Bulawayo-based, Chipman is a dancehall and reggae artiste who is also a mbira player. He was born at Mpilo Central Hospital 27 years go and is the last born in a family of seven. Chipman shot to fame following the release of his track Asifuni Bumbulu which was a comical take of a beating at the hands of his girlfriend’s brother when he found them chatting in the neighbourhood of Makokoba. The way Chipman narrates his story with his shonalised iSiNdebele caught the attention of many. Other tracks such as Sela also made waves. He won the Best Urban Fire at the Skyz Metro FM Music Awards in 2017 and 2018. Chipman, real name Pearcemore Chitopo, grew up in Masvingo and did his primary and part of secondary education there. He moved to Bulawayo where he completed secondary education at Faith Christian College. Chipman is a second-year student at the United College of Education in Bulawayo majoring in music. He said he loved how Paul “Dr Love” Matavire and Marko Sibanda of the Jambaja pahotera fame used social commentary in their songs. “I am inspired by what happens in our day-to-day life to write my songs. I just like the way the late Marko Sibanda and Paul Matavire used to sing their songs. That’s why I also sing about what happens in our social life in a very funny way like these two legends used to do,” said Chipman. He said his dream was to be on stage from a tender age and he liked singing Freddy Gwala tracks. “My dream was to be an artiste from my tender age. When I was still a young boy of about 6-10 years people used to call me Madamara because I liked and used to sing Freddy Gwala’s songs. Chipman used to participate in school events like school choir and drama. I also did my first song when I was in Form Four,” said Chipman. Chipman said he hoped his track Babazala that is receiving heavy rotation on local radio stations will get national acclaim. “Expect the unexpected from me this year. I released the single called Babazala which is getting heavy play on Skyz Metro FM and I am working on the visuals of this single track which my music followers should expect mid this month. I hope our TV station ZBC will play it because I dropped it at Montrose studios recently. I also dropped a music video called Africa Unite early last month which viewers said is a nice video,” said Chipman.