The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Afro-pop star, Mzoe 7 recently put his choreography skills to the test after he was tasked to choreograph the Greens Supermarket Jerusalema dance challenge. For almost two weeks now, people the world over, have been embracing South African, Master KG’s Jerusalema hit by recording visuals of themselves dancing to the track as part of what has been termed the #JerusalemaDanceChallenge. Locals have not been left out as various corporates have also joined in on the fun by getting their employees to dance along to the song that recently reached 100 million views on YouTube. Taking advantage of this wave, Mzoe 7 who is riding high on the success of his Asambeni Amapiano single, said he grabbed the opportunity to choreograph the Greens supermarket video with both hands as he wanted to show people his diverse skills. Working with the Greens staff for the #JerusalemaDanceChallenge, Mzoe 7 said was great as he got to test his choreography skills. The visuals for the challenge were shot in Bulawayo and Plumtree. The video was posted on the Greens Facebook page on Tuesday. It shows jovial Greens staff conducting their day-to-day business while dancing along to the track. Mzoe 7 said other than music, he has been working on a series of diverse projects on the side-lines. “I’ve done a lot of projects (dance choreography, creative directing, scripting adverts and production of music videos) and gained a lot of experience in the process. This was after most people noticed that I was one of the best stage performers and advised me to diversify. “I took their advice and approached other creatives to see how best we could work together in order to improve their live performances. This is how I ventured into the world of choreography,” said Mzoe 7. He said in many countries creatives value choreography. “It’s pleasing to note that locals now appreciate the importance of choreography though some are still learning about it. On my part, I’ve made it known to our artistes that I’m available to help,” said Mozoe7. Before the lockdown started, Mzoe 7 said he had started a project called Dance to Stay Fit where people interested in learning how to dance and stay fit would participate. Mzoe 7 was involved in the production of the 2019 Roil Bulawayo Arts Awards and the Skyz Metro FM Awards. – @mthabisi_mthire.