The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
GOVERNMENT says former farm owners on compulsorily acquired land but are still farming should urgently regularise their tenure before considerations can be made for the issuance of 99-year leases. In July, Government and former farm owners signed the Global Compensation Deed, marking a major milestone in the restoration of trust between the two parties. The agreement was also done in the context of Vision 2030 and to ensure its timely realisation through increased agricultural productivity, among other initiatives. In a joint statement yesterday, Finance and Economic Development Minister Professor Mthuli Ncube and his Lands, Agriculture, Water and Rural Resettlement counterpart Dr Anxious Masuka said Government’s highest priority in agriculture is to increase production and productivity through collaborative efforts of all citizens. This, the joint statement said, includes skills transfer from former farm owners to the resettled farmers, and the provision of an attractive land tenure system that will be supportive of increased levels of investment on agricultural land. In light of the stated objectives, Government said: “Former farm owners on compulsorily acquired land should urgently regularise their tenure through designated Government institutions in the first instance, before consideration can be made for the issuance of the 99-year leases. Former farm owners who already hold offer letters may proceed to apply for 99-year leases.” It said those former farm owners who are indigenous Zimbabweans or citizens of countries which had ratified Bilateral Investment Protection and Promotion Agreements or Bilateral Investment Treaties with Zimbabwe at the time their land was compulsorily acquired for resettlement are entitled for compensation for land and improvements. The joint statement said this is in terms of Subsections (1) and (2) of Section 295 of the Constitution of Zimbabwe. It said this category of former farm owners is not eligible for payment of compensation under the Global Compensation Agreement signed on July 29. “Their compensation will be considered separately on a case by case basis. Through the Land Commission (Gazetted Land) (Disposal in Lieu of Compensation) Regulations (SI 62 of 2020, Government has already provided that these former farm owners can apply to the Minister of Lands, Agriculture, Water and Rural Resettlement for restoration of title to the piece of agricultural land that was compulsorily acquired from them for resettlement. “Government will grant their applications where the circumstances presently obtaining on the ground permit the restoration of their land to them. “In this regard, in order to allow former farm owners in this category to regain possession of the pieces of lands that were acquired from them, Government will, in the appropriate circumstances, revoke the offer letters of resettled farmers currently occupying those pieces of land and offer them alternative land elsewhere,” said the joint statement. It said where the situation presently obtaining on the ground makes it impractical to restore land in this category to its former owners, Government will offer the former farm owners alternative land elsewhere as restitution where such land is available. “Where a former farm owner under this category regains possession of the land that was previously acquired from them or accepts an offer by Government of land as restitution, this shall be in full and final settlement, or to the extent that may be mutually agreed with Government of any claims for compensation from the State that the former farm owner may have,” read the statement. Government said where it is not possible or desirable for the State to restore the acquired land to its former farm owner or offer alternative land, the State shall offer compensation to the ex-farmer based on the same valuation methodology as was applied under the Global Compensation Deed. Consistent with the Second Republic’s thrust to increase production and productivity in the agricultural sector and in order to anchor the attainment of an upper middle-income economy by 2030, Government has taken a deliberate policy position to initially exempt fully utilised productive farms from downsizing. This will be until agricultural land under multiple farm ownership, derelict and or under utilised has been brought into production and thus Ministers of State for Provincial Affairs and Provincial Lands Committees shall ensure strict adherence to the above policy. “Government has received numerous reports regarding the resurgence of illegal occupations, particularly on highly productive farms thereby disrupting production. This comes at a time when the focus should be on increasing utilisation and productivity on agricultural land. “These illegal farm occupations are taking place in complete disregard of offer letters which Government has issued to the affected farmers. “Such disorderly behaviour among citizens is indiscipline of the highest level which Government does not condone or tolerate. It should stop forthwith,” read the statement. — @okazunga