The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
ON Wednesday, the ambitious school of cricket excellence, Old Mutual Heath Streak Academy, announced that it was making technical changes and appointed 30-year-old Tafadzwa Muzarawetu as one of its coaches. Joining the Old Mutual Heath Streak Academy meant that Muzarawetu, had to quit playing to focus on his passion of developmental coaching. The former Mashonaland Eagles and Mountaineers player almost quit the game in 2012 due to frustrations of playing second fiddle and “wasting” time bowling in the nets. Back then, as he was contemplating quitting cricket, an unexpected call up to the Mashonaland Eagles Castle Logan Cup team saved his game from going into abyss. Muzarawetu is grateful to former national Under-19 and national team coach Steve Mangongo for saving his career by giving him his first class debut at Mashonaland Eagles. In his debut against Midwest Rhinos, Muzarawetu took a wicket in each innings, removing former Zimbabwe Test batsman Mark Vermeulen as well as overseas professional Jaik Mickleburgh. Sadly for him, the match ended in agony, as Rhinos won the four-day match by 323 runs. But that was the beginning of many exciting outings for the seamer, who announced his retirement during the week when he headed to Bulawayo. As a player, he shared the dressing room with the likes of Chamu Chibhabha, Elton Chigumbura, Mark Vermuelen, Nathan Waller, Trevor Garwe, Ryan Butterworth, Ray Price, Prosper Utseya and Tino Mutombodzi. Muzarawetu’s struggles as an aspiring cricketer drove him into coaching, and with the Heath Streak Academy’s vision to equip aspiring cricketers with correct techniques as well as providing up-and-coming coaches with an opportunity to showcase their skills, made Muzarawetu settle for the project. At the academy, established in Bulawayo’s Suburbs in 2014 and another wing in Harare in 2018, Muzarawetu will work closely with the academy’s administrator Carrie-Anne Lees, who has been elevated to head the management team, and coach Shaun Joseph in spearheading grassroots development. Ray Kasimo and Shayne Chigumbura are also part of the Bulawayo-based technical team. The father of two, a boy aged four and a two-year-old girl, wants to make an impression in development cricket and believes he can achieve his dreams at the academy. He also played club cricket for Glenshire, Uprising in the United Kingdom and the famed Takashinga from Highfield in Harare, and is a holder of a Level 1 coaching certificate attained when he attended the Zimbabwe National Academy in 2013. “I feel happy and privileged to be working with the family at the academy. I arrived this week in Bulawayo and I love everything about this place. Even from my playing days, Bulawayo used to be my favourite hunting ground. “Obviously as a coach I want to produce the best cricketers and this is going to take a lot of hard work. I’m ready for the hard work and I have the passion and drive to make it possible. Watch this space, the best is yet to come,” Muzarawetu said. Maybe this is the positive vibe that got him a permanent gig at the Heath Streak Academy, which occasionally uses national team cricketers to train promising youngsters. National team captain Sean Williams has also been helping out at the academy, by training children to boost their morale. Muzarawetu’s coaching career started in 2013 and he has had stints with his former primary school Glenview, Westridge High School and Hatfield Cricket Club. He got his first cricket shoes from Vusi Sibanda after bowling a session at one of the national team training sessions. “You know, growing up sometimes I would go for practice without eating and as a bowler I struggled to even have bowling boots until one day Vusi Sibanda saw me bowling in the nets with the national guys wearing trainers. “He was impressed with how I was bowling and went straight to his bag and gave me my first pair of boots. They were batting boots, but I was the happiest kid on earth that day. “So I understand what those underprivileged children face because they can’t buy equipment, but love cricket. I was raised by a single parent, my mother, and she struggled to even give me bus fare to go for club games. ‘She would go and beg neighbours for money so that I go for club cricket before I made it in professional cricket. Being where I am has been a huge struggle, hence my dream and desire to help aspiring cricketers by sharing my story and coaching them,” said Muzarawetu. He is likely to develop as an impact coach at the Heath Streak Academy. Joseph Rego, the academy’s chief executive officer, said plans are underway to get sponsorship to send their coaches to South Africa to capacitate them, and Muzarawetu could find himself adding another coaching badge. It has always been Streak’s desire to give aspiring coaches a platform to further their skills. “It is my ultimate goal to turn the Heath Streak Academy into a school of cricket and my vision of hiring professionals at the management and coaching level is bound to turn my dream into reality,” said Rego. The academy has also been focusing on developing cricketers from underprivileged communities, offering them free lessons at their facilities. Muzarawetu wants to see cricketers that have a “difficult” upbringing also enjoying the game. “I come from an underprivileged background and started playing the game when I was still a colt. I never got a chance to play in the age groups, but will just go and bowl with the national team or franchise players in the nets. I then started going to Mashonaland Eagles at a time (the late) Kevin Curran was in charge and then later on Steve Mangongo, the man who gave me my debut and nurtured me to be what I am today. I went on to have a good career, especially in the Logan Cup, and also got a chance to play in England in 2015. I played a season in the Premier League and Division 1 cricket for Harefield there and also did some coaching. “It was in England that the passion for coaching kids came. I came back and introduced cricket at my local primary school because I wanted the underprivileged children to enjoy playing the game. “I did this for free. Furthering my career as a coach and helping kids is what attracted me to come from Harare to fulfil my dream,” said Muzarawetu. He has already hit the ground running and has been conducting training sessions at the academy. “Never give up in life and keep working hard until you reach the promised land, which is playing for the national side.” — @ZililoR