The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
Midlands Province has received inputs under the Gatshompo/Pfumvudza programme as Government keeps its pledge to avail inputs on time. More than 93 000 farmers in the Midlands have undergone training under the zero-tillage agricultural programme introduced by Government to optimise grain production. The programme has been quickly embraced by communities in Mberengwa, Chirumhanzi, Gokwe South and Kwekwe. Government is encouraging zero tillage in areas that receive below average rains as the farming method helps to keep moisture. One of the advantages of Gatshompo/Pfumvudza is that it improves soil structure as there is minimum disruption to the soil. This means that more nutrients are preserved in the soil for plant growth resulting in high yields. Zero tillage also reduces erosion as it leaves more residue on the surface compared to the other farming method that involves completely turning the soil. In an interview, Midlands provincial crop and livestock officer Mrs Madeline Magwenzi said they have already received inputs under the Gatshompo/Pfumvudza programme. She said farmers who have completed land preparations will receive the inputs first. “We have received farming inputs for farmers under Gatshompo/Pfumvudza programme in the Midlands province. This means farmers are getting the inputs ahead of the farming season thereby enabling them to plant with the first rains,” she said. Mrs Magwenzi said the farming inputs are already at the GMB deports awaiting distribution. She said those that have completed preparing the land for planting will receive the inputs first hence it was important for farmers to speed up land preparations. Addressing Zanu-PF Midlands Provincial Co-ordinating Committee recently, Midlands Provincial Affairs Minister Senator Larry Mavima said the province’s target was to double the number of trained farmers before the onset of the rains. “On Gatshompo/Pfumvudza programme, the province is training as many farmers to adopt the new farming method to ensure food security at household level. More than 93 000 farmers have so far been registered and trained. There was a high turnout in Gokwe South and Kwekwe who have 19 251 and 15 080 farmers trained respectively,” he said. Senator Mavima said Gatshompo/Pfumvudza will help mitigate the effects of drought in the province as farmers will be able to harvest even if the rains are poor.