The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
TWELVE-year-old poet, Methembe Oxide Jnr Moyo, son of award-winning poet, Desire “Moyoxide” Moyo, has set a five-year target for his arts career which is envisioned with bagging awards and gracing international stages. The young lad who doubles up as a dancer is certainly following in his father’s footsteps and believes he is the next great thing to emerge from Nkulumane. Just last week, Oxide Jnr and his sister Nomalanga “Choice Oxide” Moyo emerged winners of the Ama2000 dance challenge showing how much talent the Moyo kids, who have performed at various events, possess. Oxide Jnr who has been doing poetry for the past three years said his father, from the onset, has been backing his arts passion which all began at Sigombe Primary School in Nkulumane when he was in Grade 4. “The phrase, like father like son, inspired me to do arts as I wanted to be like my father. I remember one day, I told my dad to write me a poem which I wanted to recite during an Ecobank function at school. I performed so well that the news reached my father. “Since then, he has always supported me and taken me to higher competitive platforms. I always work hard to ensure I don’t disappoint him,” Oxide Jnr said. He said his poetry work is driven by a vision similar to that of his father, which is centred on being a human and children rights advocate. “My poetry is driven by a vision of being a human rights champion. I view speaking the truth as a way of empowering a community. As children, we also want the good life so I want to use my poetry to give hope, fight the bad and also bring happiness.” Those who attend events in Bulawayo will remember Oxide Jnr for his scintillating performance at the inaugural BAAs in 2017. That year was a good one for him as he came third at the Albert Nyathi Talent Search (ANTS) competition. He competed again last year and took first position. When he is not performing poetry on stage, Oxide Jnr who seems to be a boy of many talents, takes centre stage by performing at Revival of Jesus Miracles Ministries Church services and Nkulumane Baptist Church. Alongside his young sister Nomalanga, Oxide Jnr changes form and takes up a dancing role. In the next five years, Oxide Jnr said he is confident that he will be ripe enough to take on the arts industry. “I’ll be 17 years old then and I think I’ll be ripe enough to brand my poetry and make waves. I want to win the Namas (National Arts Merit Awards) and BAAs (Bulawayo Arts Awards) among other prestigious awards come 2025.” — @mthabisi_mthire.