The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
BEITBRIDGE-based producer Keith Zulu has proved that through perseverance and courage no disability can steal away his passion as he has defied all odds and is producing exquisite music using his feet. Unable to operate freely using his hands, Keith Dee-jay RixxKaz as most refer to him is one man who when he takes to his computer, leaves people in awe, showing how good he is at mixing beats using his feet.
Keith Dee-jay RixxKaz told Chronicle Showbiz: “Ever since I was a kid l have always been obsessed with music and l started to learn how to produce music all by myself when I was 18 years old in 2014. “I did my first single called Set Me Free in 2016 which featured Bhadilah’s sister Akhonamandla Ndlovu and it’s yet to be released but am sure in the coming weeks it will be out.” Keith who is inspired by Black Coffee and Avicii said through his music passion he has worked with talented musicians in the border town among them Prince Adrie Music and Bhadilah. Bhadilah said after meeting Keith Dee-jay RixxKaz and listening to one of his beats he fell in love with his work and they are busy cooking a storm — a single titled Humbelani. “He invited me to come over to his place so that I listen to some of his stuff and see if we could make something, that was around March this year. Due to some projects I was busy with I couldn’t get to him since then but I was so happy that finally on Wednesday 26 August I visited him. “Disability is not inability. I couldn’t believe my ears when he gave me his headphones to feel his first beat from his laptop. An absolutely amazing Amapiano touch that matches that of the Amapiano hits we all know. “It is by God’s grace and plans that we are working on something together. Talent is talent no matter your condition, let’s support a brother for a cause,” he said.
Bhadilah said the track to be released by next month is about encouraging the public never to lose hope but continue pushing hard. “The track that we are working on titled Humbelani meaning celani in isiNdebele and kumbirai in ChiShona. It basically seeks to give hope to the ghetto youths and everyone pursuing what ever dream they have that there is still hope if we ask from God,” said Bhadilah. Another artiste Prince Adrie Musi also heaped praises on Keith. “Keith Dee-jay RixxKaz is the man behind most of my projects on my latest singles. I learnt a lot of stuff through working with him. “He is such a humble person. I wish to see his talent being brought out to the world one day,” posted Prince Adrie Music. — @mthabisi_mthire.