The Chronicle CONSTITUTIONAL liberalism is a government system where civilian liberties are guaranteed by the supreme law of the land which is the Constitution. Constitutional liberalism makes clear provisions for individual citizens to enjoy their rights such as the freedom of expression, freedom of association and freedom of religion, without any hindrances from the state and the law. These rights are non-negotiable at any stage and cannot be violated by anyone. President Mnangagwa, who took a different path from that of his predecessor when he assumed office in November 2017, has always made it clear that he will uphold civilian liberties. True to his word, he has reformed the Zimbabwe Republic Police, created the international Motlanthe Commission, opened discussion on Gukurahundi, aligned laws with the Constitution and set up a number of constitutional commissions, among other interventions. However, while upholding values of constitutional liberalism, President Mnangagwa’s administration has also remained a responsible Government that will protect civilian life and the Constitution even if it means use of force. Wrote English philosopher Thomas Hobbes: “Covenants, without the sword, are but words, and of no strength to secure a man at all.”
Words for words, sword for sword, gun for gun. The irresponsible and equally illogical claims by opposition elements that the recent shooting of two criminals who stormed a police base in Chivhu and attacked soldiers was tantamount to extrajudicial killings, should not be taken lightly. It is evidence of the opposition’s inability to uphold the Constitution and protect Zimbabweans from criminal elements. MDC-Alliance spokesperson Ms Fadzayi Mahere posted on Twitter saying: “Who decided that these citizens killed the soldier? By what process? What happened to arresting, investigating & prosecuting? These extrajudicial killings point to a breakdown of our social structure. This illegality, violence & militarisation of civilian spaces must end.” Without sword, Government cannot be taken seriously even by the weak and vulnerable which it seeks to defend. President Mnangagwa and his Government will protect all Zimbabweans: soldiers, civilians, opposition elements. The President was clear when he said his Government will not tolerate anyone who attacks, harms or kills any member of the security forces and anyone who dares cross the line will be severely punished. That is exactly what a responsible government does. If you do not want to be punished, don’t cross the line. Simple. A swift response from a combined force of the country’s military and law enforcement agents resulted in the assailants, who were armed with AK47 rifles being shot dead as they tried to evade arrest on Sunday. As our Political Editor rightfully stated yesterday, by co-operating with the security services in apprehending the two criminals, Zimbabweans showed their love of peace and tranquillity, a lesson to all those who want to bring chaos into the country. In a statement, President Mnangagwa described the killing of the soldiers as “cowardly and senseless”. “The cowardly and senseless attack by an assailant on the two soldiers who were enforcing lockdown measures aimed at mitigating the spread of the deadly coronavirus 2019 (Covid-19) at the police base near the Chivhu Chicken Inn, must be condemned in the strongest possible terms by all peace-loving Zimbabweans. “Government will not tolerate anyone who attacks, harms or kills any member of the security establishment, let alone disarming and unlawfully taking arms of war in their possession. Any breach of this nature will attract severe punishment,” he said. Let those with ears hear. Civil liberties will be enjoyed by those who do not harm others and abide by the Constitution.