The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
RENOWNED rhumba music outfit Mokis Connection say they want to make a strong comeback onto the music scene once lockdown measures are eased. The group which hails from Mafa village in Bulilima district has been on a hiatus due to the ongoing pandemic and closure of borders as some of their members are holed up in South Africa. The group which was a hit at national galas and is popular for tracks such as Irene, Ndazi Ndazi and Wafa Wafa, is now in studio recording new music in preparation for the comeback. They say they are just waiting for Covid-19 restrictions to be relaxed so that borders reopen. In an interview at his home in Mafa village recently, the band founder, Morgan “Moki” Ncube said the group is rehearsing hard in preparation for the stage. “As the Covid-19 pandemic seems to be easing, we’re now busy with rehearsals so that when live shows resume, we’ll come out stronger than before. Our music is still alive and thus people should expect fireworks from Mokis Connection, just as it was back in the days,” Moki said. He said since members have been physically separated by the pandemic, rehearsals are being conducted on the virtual space through WhatsApp. To keep the group relevant, Moki said he is roping in young musicians in order to ensure the Mokis Connection legacy lives on. A member of the group, Dingilwazi Ncube who is one of the young musicians, said working with renowned musicians in the group is good as it brings about the growth of the stable. Ncube is known for the role he played in the hit song, Hlakanipha Ndoda. “Our goal as the young generation is to ensure that the group does not die and as young ones we want to assure our fans that we’ll bring back memories of Mokis Connection shows,” Ncube said. Mokis Connection was popular when Themba “Boyoyo” Mathe was its lead vocalist before he left unceremoniously in 2013. The greatest challenge for the group has been to get someone who can match or even surpass what Boyoyo was doing. — @mthabisi_mthire.