The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Dancer, Lavona Staal who was nominated for the Roil Bulawayo Arts Awards last year in the Outstanding Female Dancer category has been described as a young woman whose life was cut short before her dancing talent was seen by the world. Lavona died at the age of 32 on Tuesday after suffering an asthma attack at work. She was pronounced dead upon arrival at hospital. Her father, John Staal chronicled how Lavona had the attack on Tuesday morning, when the weather was windy and cold. “On Tuesday, the weather was cold and windy and for people who suffer from asthma, that isn’t good weather as it causes problems for them. Lavona left home in the morning indicating that she was feeling cold. “She said her goodbyes to us and when she got to work at Mbokodo, she suffered an asthma attack at around 10AM. She asked them to take her home and what would normally happen is that we would then take her to hospital to get a nebuliser there,” said Staal. “While on her way home, she caught a second attack and unfortunately on admission to Mater Dei, she was gone.” Staal, a drummer, said Lavona and him were very close. Together, they formed a musical group called Destiny in 2015 where she was his lead singer. “We had a group that we started called Destiny. I was a drummer and she worked with me for some time. Later on, she told me that she wanted to pursue her passion which was dancing and I didn’t stand in her way,” said Staal. He said he discovered his daughter’s singing talent after a teacher at Bulawayo Adventist High School told him that she could sing. “She was a beautiful person in her own way. We had our own feelings, times and we shouted at each other, but the next thing, we were back to loving each other like father and daughter,” said Staal. RoilBAA organisers described Lavona as Bulawayo’s ballerina with their spokesperson, Nkululeko Nkala saying Bulawayo and Zimbabwe at large, has lost a shining star in the arts industry. “When she was nominated last year and did not win, that did not mean that her talent wasn’t good enough. Lavona was very much worthy and she was destined for certain heights. Gone too soon,” said Nkala. Musician Novuyo Seagirl who worked with Lavona in the play Shaken not Stirred in 2015 said she was in disbelief that she was gone. “The short time I worked with her, I noticed that she was a bubbly and free spirited person. I remember how passionate she was about her dancing. When we were doing the Shaken not Stirred play, you could see that dancing was her life and I always admired that about her. “She loved having fun and she lived every minute of her life to the fullest. We’ve really lost an amazing talent and it’s sad,” said Seagirl. Iyasa director, Nkululeko Dube said the arts had lost a symbol of unity as Lavona’s talent brought all races together. “The arts are poorer without Lavona. She was a symbol of togetherness for the sector especially in a city where arts and artistes are sometimes divided according to race, colour and creed. We have lost a part of our good future in the arts. May she rest in eternal peace. “We now all have an obligation to carry on her legacy,” Dube said. Lavona’s funeral will be held today at Victory Fellowship where a service will be held under strict Covid-19 regulations. Thereafter, she will be laid to rest at Athlone Cemetery. – @bonganinkunzi