The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
ZANU-PF Matabeleland South Province is planning to restructure and form new cells as part of efforts to rejuvenate the party in preparation for the 2023 elections. Speaking after a Provincial Executive Committee (PEC) meeting on Friday, Zanu-PF Matabeleland South Province Chairman, Cde Rabelani Choeni said the restructuring exercise should rejuvenate the party as it seeks to retain constituencies in its hands and reclaim those in the hands of the opposition. He urged party members to remain united and not be misled by Western countries that were spreading false information about the party and Government in a bid to stall development in the country. “Realising that people shouldn’t hold large gatherings and move around unnecessarily in line with Covid-19 regulations we decided to hold a PEC meeting so that we can start the process of formulating and strengthening our cells in preparation for 2023 elections. We realised that people might end up relaxing and not work at grassroots level. We want to ensure that we work for the party and strengthen it even during the pandemic,” he said. “Cells are there everywhere across the province but we want to ensure that more are formed in preparation for 2023. This is a crucial process as the party has to gain its strength from the bottom for it to be successful at the highest level. Restructuring will then come after cell formulation. This was a meeting to come up with recommendations which we will then present at a PCC meeting and then from there we will further plan on how we will proceed with the cell formation and restructuring process.” Cde Choeni said the purpose of the PEC meeting was also to welcome the War Veterans League which was being led by Cde Ntombiyakhe Ndlovu in Matabeleland South. He said the league’s executive was presented to the meeting and it will be further presented to PCC members. Cde Choeni said the party was saddened by the loss of one of its members Cde Nqabeni Nkala who was the councillor of Ward 20 in Umzingwane who succumbed to Covid-19 recently. He said the party was working to retain the seat. “We are ready as a party and we want to retain this seat. In fact, we are on an ambush and any vacant seat that will arise we will take as we target to gain control of all council and national assembly seats in the province. We would also like to applaud Cde Richard Ndlovu who has been appointed a Politburo member,” he said. — @DubeMatutu