The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIMBABWE’S most active footballer on social media Gabriel Nyoni says upholding “personal principles” over money influenced his decision to join South Africa’s GladAfrica Championship side Cape Umoya over topflight clubs. Nyoni made a shocking decision to join the First Division side last week, something that was viewed as a rushed move for the player who could have bargained as a free agent. There was hope that the former Highlanders and Caps United winger, who made 10 appearances for South African Premiership side Maritzburg United, would attract some topflight clubs after his departure from the KwaZulu-Natal side. Cape Umoya seem to have invested “a lot” in Nyoni since his divorce from Maritzburg. In an interview from his new base in Cape Town, Nyoni said he had to forgo topflight football and foreign interest as a way of paying back Cape Umoya for their “generosity”. Cape Umoya director, ex-Orlando Pirates coach Roger De Sa’s “personal touch” in reaching out to Nyoni at the player’s weakest point after severing ties with Maritzburg United influenced the winger’s decision to join the First Division club. Nyoni joined Maritzburg United in July last year from Caps United, a few months after switching from Highlanders where he had been playing since 2013, but his contract with the KwaZulu-Natal club was “mutually” terminated in June. Injuries plagued his stay at Maritzburg and was one of the major causes of the divorce. The speedy winger had signed a two-year contract at Maritzburg United, with the option of a 12-month extension. The news about the contract termination due to injuries came as a blow to Nyoni, who seemed to have been on the mend and ambitious Cape Umoya jumped at the opportunity to sign the attacking midfielder, who had shown glimpses of brilliance when he did duty for Maritzburg. He told Chronicle Sport that Cape Umoya had been taking care of his welfare since his “divorce” with Maritzburg. “It wasn’t a difficult decision to settle for Cape Umoya because the offer they put was almost the same as I had before (at Maritzburg). Also, the way they treated me so well, especially Roger De Sa, during the period I wasn’t playing had an influence on my choice,” said Nyoni, who snubbed some offers in South Africa and abroad. “Actually some (South African teams) did contact me and I even had inquiries coming from as far as Egypt, but I had to pay back Cape Umoya for taking good care of me from accommodation to everything after I left Maritzburg. I think this is a good decision for me and I’m looking forward to the challenge.” Asked how De Sa treated him, Nyoni said: “It’s personal stuff.” Nyoni, who missed the last part of the season after being left out of Maritzburg side that went to “the bubble” in Gauteng to complete the league that had been affected by Covid-19, is looking forward to joining his new teammates. “I haven’t started training with the rest of the team as yet, but so far I am in love with the environment. Barring injuries, I want to help the team get into the Premier Soccer League for the first time and also get accustomed to South African football more. I also want to be the NFD’s top goal scorer,” Nyoni said. – @ZililoR