The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo, Senior Features Reporter
FEW can say they knew of the luxury house boats, cruises, rich wildlife and conserved traditional cultures in Binga before today. That the Matusadona National Park, which is home to all the animals one would want to see in Zimbabwe, starts just east of Binga, may be news to most. Sky-walking at the Mutarazi Falls in Nyanga, the Gonarezhou National Park in Masvingo province, Chinhoyi Caves and white rhino tracking at the Matopos National Park add to the long list of tourist attractions in the country little known to most Zimbabweans. In the past, those who could would take holidays in the region and abroad. They would know quite a bit about destinations outside of Zimbabwe and very little about those in their country. On the other hand, the narrative, has, for many years been of a people who are surrounded by prime tourist resorts they have never accessed mostly due to high pricing models inaccessible to locals. Tourist packages have in some instances been exorbitantly priced for locals despite being pegged slightly lower than those of international tourists. However, the tourism economy has been heavily hit by the Covid-19 pandemic, and measures introduced to contain its spread. Depending on the duration of the crisis, revised scenarios indicate that the potential shock could range between a 60 to 80 percent decline in the international tourism economy in 2020. Beyond immediate measures to support the tourism sector, countries are also shifting to develop recovery measures. These include considerations on lifting travel restrictions, restoring traveller confidence and rethinking the tourism sector for the future. There has been too much focus on international tourism in developing countries in comparison to domestic tourism but the global Covid-19 pandemic, which has affected travel trends as a result of lockdowns in countries across the world, has shown that international tourism is highly sensitive to transnational trends like global financial crises, sustainability issues and public health concerns. But, as more and more travellers refrain from visiting international destinations in view of the coronavirus crisis and the subsequent uncertainty regarding the safety of air travel, domestic tourism should gain popularity. In the short-term, travellers will turn their focus to local destinations and plan more trips within the borders of their own countries. Meanwhile, research shows that Zimbabwe is struggling to increase domestic tourism as locals have lower disposable income for them to visit local leisure facilities. The economy is negatively affecting domestic tourism; there is poor marketing of tourism to local people and awareness and synergies with the private sector to provide special packages for domestic tourists has not yielded the required results. The closure of borders and restricted air travel has necessitated the need to promote domestic tourism which has not received much attention over the years. Yet, domestic tourists, despite being low spenders are critical for the discovery and eventual development of destinations. Over the years, tourism participation has grown from being a luxury enjoyed by the rich to a right that everyone, even the poor should enjoy. According to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), domestic tourism, which accounts for around 75 percent of the tourism economies in OECD countries, is expected to recover more quickly. It offers the main chance for driving recovery, particularly in countries, regions and cities where the sector supports many jobs and businesses. The impact of the crisis is being felt throughout the entire tourism ecosystem, and reopening and rebuilding destinations will require a joined approach. Tourism businesses and workers are benefiting from economy-wide stimulus packages, with many governments also introducing tourism specific measures. Governments and industry are focusing their efforts on lifting travel restrictions and working with businesses to access liquidity support, apply new health protocols for safe travel, and help to diversify their markets. It is imperative to restore traveller confidence and stimulate demand with new safe and clean labels for the sector, information apps for visitors and domestic tourism promotion campaigns. Governments need to prepare comprehensive tourism recovery plans, rebuild destinations, encourage innovation and investment, and rethink the tourism sector. These actions are essential, but experts say to reopen the tourism economy successfully and get businesses up and running, more needs to be done in a coordinated way as tourism services are very interdependent. The travel and tourism industry and governments should continue to reinforce their coordination mechanisms to accompany the businesses, notably the smallest ones, and the workers. Particular attention should be given to the most sensitive or vulnerable destinations in the recovery phase. Looking ahead, the measures put in place today will shape tourism of tomorrow. Governments, says OECD, need to consider the long term implications of the crisis, while staying ahead of the digital curve, supporting the low carbon transition, and promoting the structural transformation needed to build a stronger, more sustainable and resilient tourism economy. The crisis is an opportunity to rethink tourism for the future. There indeed is light at the end of the tunnel. Players in the industry have realised that one of the ways to pocket cash from domestic tourists is through reduced pricing. Many businesses continue to lower rates and offer attractive packages to locals in order to keep their establishments open. This is commendable. In fact, it is a win-win situation. More locals get to access prime resorts at affordable prices while businesses save jobs and remain operational. It might be a while before we see international tourist arrivals in the country again. Until then, pushing domestic tourism shall be the only saving grace. — @Yolisswa