The Chronicle Andile Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
Thorngrove Infectious Diseases Hospital is set to have uninterrupted power supply after a local company approached the institution and offered to set up a solar system as back-up at the hospital’s isolation ward. The hospital already had solar power for times when it cannot access power from the national grid due to power cuts, which however is only for selected wards. The new power plant will ensure that patients and staff are not plunged into crisis and that critical hospital equipment can be used 24/7 without interruption. Essential equipment that needs uninterrupted power supplies includes respirators, ventilators and oxygen tanks. The solar system is being installed by Chloride Zimbabwe, the makers of Exide batteries. The company representative said they were touched by the need of communities and business to partner in the fight against Covid-19. “We are a company whose core ethics are to change the lives of people and we just happen to make batteries. We, therefore, identified the needs. There has been so much talk about communities joining hands in the fight against Covid-19 and we asked ourselves about what we could do to join the fight and do our part. So, we approached the city council and then this project started. “We will set up and install solar system for the isolation hospital and we hope that this is only the beginning of a lasting relationship with the hospital and with council. We hope by this small gesture, more of such small gestures from more of our community members will all end up in a much bigger donation,” said the Chloride Zimbabwe regional manager Ms Rudorwashe Shiringo. Meanwhile, a local organisation, Thuthuka Matabeleland Trust led by Mr Dakamela Ncube, also donated groceries for patients at the hospital which included mealie meal, instant porridge, biscuits and powdered soups. The director of the trust said he hoped that more Bulawayo residents take up initiatives to develop the city and its structures. “I have travelled across the country and have noted with admiration what some people do in their communities. Yes, the Government has a mandate to work and provide for its people, but there is so much that we can do to better our conditions of existence. Let us take up initiatives to do our own things and build our own dreams,” he said. Another organisation, Bulawayo Babies, donated face masks for use at council health centres across the city. Mayor Councillor Solomon Madlala Mguni and Bulawayo Town Clerk Mr Christopher Dube reiterated the need for Bulawayo residents to come together in the fight against the Covid-19 virus. “This requires us as Bulawayo to come together. It’s not a time for politics or blame games but a time to fight together for our health and for the health of our loved ones. It is acts such as these that give hope sanity and our gratitude goes to our donors. As city of Bulawayo we will continue to work and partner with stakeholders as the health of the people of this city,” said the mayor. The town clerk urged people to abide by the standing rules and regulations that have been put in place to combat the spread of Covid-19.-@andile_tshuma