The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
AS the country gets into the groove of the 21-day lockdown, radio personality Manurse (born Manurse Ndlovu Mamlevu) has said she is eager to court listeners during this period. Through Bulawayo’s radio station, Skyz Metro FM, the Bulilima-bred broadcaster who hosts the Esabantu Breakfast Show with Bkay said she hopes to create lasting relationships with an extremely captive audience that needs help to deal with the outbreak. Broadcasting from home and work, Manurse who ventured into broadcasting in 2012 under ZBC’s Radio Zimbabwe said: “Being part of such a milestone of helping listeners at home by giving them information on what is happening in the outside world is inspiring. “Usually, people are occupied so we never really get the time to connect so I’m also using this period to interact and interview them to have an appreciation of how they’re coping with this pandemic.” Known also as the Kalanga Child, Manurse, said she was working from home mostly as part of measures to stop the spread of Covid-19, a virus which has killed thousands and forced the nation to put its people on lockdown. “Due to Covid-19 and measures put to prevent its spread, I’m now working from home although I do my morning shift at the studio from 6am to 10am,” she said. Working from home, Manurse said, has been quite eye opening as she has had to make do with the little she has to come up with a miniature studio. With more and more fake news being consumed through social media, Marnurse urged people to turn to the traditional media such as radio and newspapers for accurate news. To ensure that she reaches out to as many people, she said she is using different languages to communicate and engage with listeners. “As a person from the Kalanga community, I feel not much is not being done to educate our people about this Covid-19 through their languages. I was happy though to see fliers circulating on social media written in Kalanga and other languages on preventive measures against coronavirus. “I myself will try to send out information on Covid-19 in Tjikalanga and other languages to make sure no one is left out. Information should be sent in our local languages and ensure people are educated about this pandemic and how to fight it and prevent it from spreading.” — @mthabisi_mthire.