The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
ZIMBABWE is set to receive another consignment of laboratory diagnostic test kits, medical face masks, protective suits and face shields, including the much-needed ventilators from Chinese billionaire Jack Ma. The donation by Jack Ma Foundation will help in strengthening and intensifying surveillance, laboratory testing and case management of Covid-19 in the country. Last month, the Chinese billionaire donated 20 000 laboratory diagnostic test kits, 100 000 medical face masks and 1 000 protective suits and face shields to the Government. In his official Twitter page, Chinese Ambassador to Zimbabwe Mr Guo Shaochun yesterday announced that Zimbabwe is among 54 countries in Africa set to benefit from the second batch of the Jack Ma Foundation donation. “Another batch of donations by Jack Ma Foundation is coming, including the most needed ventilators. We are together to fight the virus,” he said. The consignment donated by Jack Ma Foundation through the African Union includes 500 ventilators, 200 000 suits and face shields, 2 000 thermometers, one million swabs and extraction kits and 500 000 gloves. Since the outbreak of Covid-19, China has been working closely with the Zimbabwean Government in providing support to jointly treat the patients, contain and mitigate the effects. President Mnangagwa last week declared a total lockdown on the country as part of robust measures to contain the spread of the deadly global pandemic. So far, nine cases of Covid-19 have been recorded in Zimbabwe including one fatality, but globally, Covid-19 has killed over 60 000 while confirmed infections have surpassed the one million mark. The pandemic, first reported in China in December 2019 has spread rapidly throughout the world, forcing many countries to enforce lockdowns in a bid to halt new infections. President Mnangagwa recently said the road to completing the 21-day Covid-19 lockdown aimed at curbing the spread of the coronavirus is long but is the right thing to do, and thanked Zimbabweans for their self-discipline. The lockdown clocked one-week on Monday and the President said the levels of compliance by Zimbabweans have been impressive. — @mashnets