The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
BULAWAYO budding tennis player Kudzai Chapepa is appealing for US$800 to help her participate in an International Tennis Federation (ITF) juniors’ tournament to be held in Mozambique after the Covid-19 lockdown. Chapepa, who turns 12 on April 22, has competed in at least 60 tournaments, including eight international circuits. With an agile, heavy topspin forehand, an incredible work ethic and winning mentality, the up-and-coming star is coached by experienced coach Thesly Mufunda. The Carmel Primary School learner, who is also a gifted swimmer and sprinter, was supposed to participate in the Mozambique circuit during the April schools’ holiday, but the tournament was postponed to a later date due to the coronavirus lockdown. Her father, Fredrick, appealed to well-wishers for assistance to raise the US$800 for airfares and team kit. Tennis Zimbabwe communicated to him thatUS$700 is for the airfares and US$100 for the kit, while the ITF will foot accommodation bill. “We are aware of the present challenges brought about by the coronavirus lockdown and our hope is that once business resumes, well-wishers will have Kudzai in mind,” said Chapepa senior. Kudzai, the 2018 and 2019 Zimbabwe Under-12 champion, also won the Gauteng East Mini South Africa Under-12 title in 2017. Presently ranked 63rd on the continent in her age group, Chapepa took part in seven international competitions last year and was the runner-up in the Gauteng Belgrave Mini held in February. She got a bronze medal with Team Zimbabwe at the African Junior Championships, finished 10th in the first-leg of the ITF/CAT African Junior Under-14 category and took 17th place in the second-leg of the competition held in Zimbabwe in June last year. She finished 10th and 12th in the first and second-legs of the Mauritius ITF/CAT African Junior competition respectively in which she competed in the Under-14 age group. She ended 2019 with a 17th-place finish in the Cape Town Under-12 Growth Point Super 8 competition in December. — @ZililoR