The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
UNITED Kingdom-based Ellen Chiwenga, who recently announced her intention to run for the Zifa presidency, has partnered with Bring Hope Humanitarian Foundation to donate hygiene products and medicines to Zimbabwean youths, especially those involved in sports. The initiative will be a first in efforts by Chiwenga, a Fifa-registered match agent, to help underprivileged communities in Zimbabwe. “A detailed distribution plan outlining the distribution plan will be availed soon to make sure the donated items reach the intended beneficiaries and also avoid the items finding their way into the black market. These items are for the vulnerable Zimbabwean youths who are also talented in the field of sport, arts and entertainment,” said Chiwenga. Once the goods arrive in Zimbabwe, they will be handed over to the First Lady Amai Auxilia Mnangagwa, who will then superintend over the whole handover ceremonies to various recipients to ensure they reach the intended beneficiaries. The donations come in the wake of an undertaking by the Ministry of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation to revamp recreational spaces countrywide as part of efforts to support grassroots structures in sport. Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation Minister Kirsty Coventry announced that her ministry is revamping 40 recreational facilities around the country to create hubs that would nurse emerging talent. “At the beginning I initiated the revamping of 40 recreational spaces countrywide, however, as we all know we are faced with the Covid-19 pandemic and this might affect our programmes in terms of funding, but we are going to keep pushing. Ideally we want these spaces to be the hub of youth, sport and art, safe spaces for young people and we will have specific sporting facilities depending on the space available. We are starting off in Mufakose (Harare) and that centre is just about done,” said Minister Coventry, on her Twitter timeline. Chiwenga said she would love to see more youths from Bulawayo and surrounding areas being assisted. “The Zimbabwe DNA of sport in general and football in particular is without doubt in Bulawayo. Some may argue otherwise, but facts on the ground point to that hence my dream is to kick-off whatever project in that part of the country,” said Chiwenga. Last month Chiwenga took to Facebook to raise concerns about difficulties she was facing to bring assistance to Zimbabwe due to bottlenecks encountered at the points of entry. She claimed her organisation was supposed to bring in aid worth more than US$1 million, but all her efforts hit a brick wall.