The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
KAIZER Chiefs strongman and former Warriors’ captain Willard Katsande on Sunday torched a social media storm when he posted a picture of himself on his verified twitter account wearing a doek and some feminine hanging pants. A number of his followers posted their reaction to the rather unusual and unexpected dressing attire by Katsande, with some even questioning the midfielder’s sexual orientation. “He is an undercover agent, don’t be fooled by these transgender tactics,” wrote a follower Xole on Twitter. OkaSobethu teased Katsande by posting: “Hello mama Katsande!” Another Twitter blogger Senzo Joy Nkutha wrote that Katsande looked like an aunt known for baking delicious scones for gatherings. Writing on Facebook, Buhle Ncube castigated Katsande for what she said was “a gay inspired fashion”. “Gay inspired dress code, not gentleman inspired. I think someone needs to advise the captain to be careful where he gets his fashion inspiration. “He is becoming too overzealous with this fashion thing and is now getting it all wrong. He should stick to football and leave this fashion thing to its owners,” wrote Ncube. Some likened Katsande to South African socialite and actor Somizi Mhlongo. Some attributed his latest fashion style to ‘boredom’ caused by the lockdown due to the Covid-19 pandemic that has seen a freeze in literally all sporting events across the world. Below are some of the social media comments: Joseph Mniki: “He is trying to beautify himself anyhow.” Brendon Mills: “Everyone got their own taste of dressing, what you may think is cool for you may not be cool for me.” Norest Masuku: “Is that dressing or preparing to compete naParaffin.” Tapiwa Mapila: “He is a nice person, but hated by many. What he touches people hate.” Dennis Madzingo: “No that is not fashion, it’s lack of fashion.” Kalid Shahadat: “Looking like grandma.” Nicholas Mpofu: “Haa a big no, what will his kids see in such a poorly dressed dad.” Gibson Masunda: “Somizi can match this.”