The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
GOVERNMENT has released operational guidelines that Small to Medium Enterprises (SMEs) exempt from the national lockdown should adhere to in order to curb the spread of Covid-19. The move has excited SMEs operators who have also called for speedy disbursement of cushion funds by the Ministry of Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare. The guidelines come after Government noted that they were some SMEs that provide essential services to the economy, particularly during this national lockdown period. According to the circular only SMEs under the food and beverages, chemical and detergents, medical supplies, agro-processing, clothing and textile, leather and footwear, plastics and packaging should apply for exemption. Players in the above sectors are required to submit applications through their respective business membership organisations such as the Bulawayo Chamber of Small-to-Medium Enterprises for submission to respective provincial parent ministry offices. In the applications, the SMEs are required to indicate their prevention plan looking at ensuring that only critical staff report to work as well as practising social distancing. Furthermore, the SMEs should ensure they maintain hygienic standards through the provision of soap, water and alcohol-based sanitisers at the workplaces. In a telephone interview, Bulawayo Chamber of SMEs chairperson Mr Energy Majazi welcomed the decision by Government saying the move promotes the continuity of their operations. “We welcome the position that Government has taken to allow some of our members in the specified sectors deemed to be essential to operate. “This will help in ensuring business continuity during this most trying time the country and the world at large is facing. However what is worrying us is that Government is yet to disburse the promised cushioning funds,” he said. Repeated efforts to get a comment from Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare Minister Professor Paul Mavima whose Ministry is admistering the cushioning fund were futile. Three weeks ago, Government announced that it was mobilising a cushioning package for small-to-medium enterprises and other vulnerable groups to mitigate the impact of the national lockdown. — @okazunga.