The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
FINANCIAL services provider, CABS has appointed Mr Mehluli Mpofu as managing director with effect from April 1, 2020 taking over from Mr Simon Hammond. The institution also appointed Mr Cecil Ndoro as deputy managing director with effect from April 1, 2020. In a statement yesterday, CABS said Mr Mpofu had been deputy managing director since July 2015. “His experience spans over 15 years in which he has held several positions including managing director of Old Mutual Investment Group (OMIG), chief investment officer in Old Mutual Kenya and head of research in OMIG. “Mehluli holds a charter in financial analysis, an MBA from the University of Cape Town’s Graduate School of Business as well as an Honours Degree in Electrical Engineering,” it said. Mr Mpofu took over from Mr Hammond who proceeded on the pre-retirement leave on April 1, 2020. Mr Hammond served as CABS managing director for more than five years. “On behalf of the board, management and staff, we would like to extend our most sincere appreciation to Simon for his contribution to CABS. “We wish him the best during his retirement,” said the company. The financial institution said Mr Ndoro has served as CABS head of corporate and institutional banking since the inception of that department in 2012. Prior to this, he has held senior positions in local and international banks. “Cecil holds an MBA, a Degree in Business Studies, a diploma in marketing management and a certificate in management from Wits Business School,” said CABS. Meanwhile, the institution has announced the upgrading of its mobile banking application system to guarantee improved security for its clients in the wake of an increase in cybercrimes. The upgrade comes with new features that give customers a smarter and more refreshed look and a faster and more reliable product. The upgrade follows CABS’ enhancement of its mobile banking application on Android and IOS in November last year. This allowed customers to do zip-it, internal transfers, balance enquiries, mini statement requests, buy airtime and Zesa tokens. The improvement allows CABS account holders to pay bills, school fees, change PIN numbers and view multiple accounts under one mobile application. With the new added features on to the application, customers can also register themselves and sign up to use the mobile application without physically visiting the bank. The upgrade also enables biometric login for customers who use handsets with fingerprint and face recognition as well as blocking and un-blocking of their cards to combat card cloning. — @okazunga.