The Chronicle Andile Tshuma Now that you are home, does it mean you have to stick to one monotonous routine for the entire 21 days of the lockdown? It doesn’t have to be that way, every cloud has a silver lining. When was the last time you kicked a ball, ducked a sponge soaked in muddy water or tried to cheat in a game of snakes and ladders when your dice took you to the longest snake that took you back to the starting point when you were a few squares from the finish box? People in Bulawayo are already talking of being fatigued by staying at home, it is understandable because starting a new routine is just not easy, it’s like trying to kill an old habit. There is a lot of defiance as people are escaping their homes and spending days beyond the confines of their dwellings, neglecting the fact that Covid-19 is real and is spreading alarmingly. As at Thursday afternoon, the cases of the novel virus had surpassed the one million mark, with deaths at more than 54 000. We have already lost a life as Zimbabweans and we already have nine confirmed cases. If we are not moved by this to stay at home, then I don’t know what else will. The 21-day lockdown gazetted by Government is for the benefit and safety of every Zimbabwean. The constant buzz around Covid-19 could disturb the mental health of millions of housebound children, and parents alike, however, people could instead look at it as an opportunity to strengthen the family bond. It is a fact that many families are in crisis and some people are locked down with abusers. Gender-based violence cases may soar, however, this talk is for another day as this edition is for people to share on what can keep them sane when confined to the home. The ongoing lockdown to contain the Covid-19 pandemic has altered everybody’s lifestyle. Besides pushing people to adopt a different way of living and working, the spread of the virus globally and the constant buzz around it is increasingly seen as a catalyst that could disturb the mental health of millions of housebound children. Some Bulawayo residents are using the 21-day lockdown declared by the Government to combat the spread of Covid-19 to engage in yesteryear activities and revive hidden talents to kill time. Lots of parents, especially in cities, are struggling to handle family, kids and work from home during the current crisis. In Zimbabwe, the generality of people live in flexible places where children’s mobility is unlimited. It is the norm for children to play in the streets or to visit each other and play at a friend’s house. In the township, there can be a playground where almost every child in the neighbourhood loves to go and play. This period of a lockdown is problematic and can therefore have some detrimental effects if not handled properly. It is necessary for parents to explain to children the facts, what exactly is happening and why everyone needs to be home. Children understand. Simple explanations about the illness itself, the quarantine and about social distancing will be helpful. It is particularly important for parents to avoid passing negative comments about “being stuck at home” when children are within hearing distance as it can paint a negative picture and contradict with earlier explanations that the lockdown is best for everyone. The current pandemic has resulted in loss of predictability, loss of routine and loss of exposure to space. Families can bring structure to their children’s life through creativity and maintaining a routine. All you need to do is structure your children’s days. It will give them control over the loss of predictability. Maybe you can put one or two hours of school work in a creative way, some story time and some personal time. The lockdown provides an opportunity for families to re-bond with children and tide over their anxiety. To add a bit of fun to a monotonous routine, it can be a good idea for parents to organise online visits to friends and relatives. Perhaps each day, there can be a 20-minute call to Aunt Sihle in Emakhandeni suburb, you may allow your child to video call a friend or school mate once in a while, just so that they have something to look forward to that’s fun. It also gives a safe window to the outside world. Popular microblogging site, Twitter, was for the past few days awash with Zimbabweans sharing lockdown activity ideas for themselves and for their children.
The posts focused on how to be entertained without spending too much time glued to television screens. Some comic videos posted online show adults playing kids’ games like driving bricks around pretending they are cars, hide and seek, skipping rope games and board games such as monopoly, scrabble, puzzles, chess, draught and Snakes and Ladders. At home, you can try outdoor activities such as umamtshayana, hop-scotch, jump rope/skipping rope depending on what you grew up calling it, scotchie, ugwini/ nhodo, intsoro, imfumbe. You can play tennis or squash if you have rackets, and partner with a wall, either perimeter wall or house wall, if you won’t mind ball prints all over. Other interesting games are playing catch, memory games such as messenger and spelling bee. There is just so much that people can do. Holiday homework can be infused into the matrix and days will go by faster if effort is made. You could even try your hand at storytelling, have bonfire nights and just tell stories. You could be bad at story telling but the fireside moments could be the plug. There is also a popular Twitter thread with the hashtag #lockdowngames, which is very interesting and can give ideas on simple but interesting things with simple available stuff at home. Think of playing hide and seek with your kids as a couple, even if you are not on talking terms, things could make a turn. Some people who spoke to this publication earlier this week said it has been years since they last opened a book adding they would resuscitate their reading culture and learn new trends in their professions. Reading is a good culture to learn and impart to children. My childhood favourites, Uncle Arthur’s bedtime stories are full of character-building stories for children, and are available online. Whatever you choose to do remember that you are doing your earnest part in helping end the pandemic sooner and that little is indeed much when love is in it. Sanitise, wash your hands, avoid touching your face, stay indoors and go out on if it’s really necessary. – @andile_tshuma