The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau 
THE International Organisation for Migration (IOM) has donated 380 tarpaulins that are used to make tents and 50 sets of non-food items (NFIs) to the National Social Security Authority (NSSA) Hotel in Beitbridge which is being used as a quarantine and isolation centre for returnees from South Africa.
Beitbridge is yet to record a positive Covid-19 case. The hotel can accommodate up to 280 people and plans are underway to modify its casino to accommodate an additional 100 people. A total of 24 people are quarantined at the hotel and the Zimbabwe Consulate in South Africa is still working on modalities to repatriate those who have volunteered to return home. So far 3 055 have registered with the consulate seeking help with various issues mainly food and repatriation. IOM’s project assistant for Beitbridge, Mr Nhamo Muleya said the donation was part of his organisation’s contribution to ongoing efforts by the Government to curtail the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic. “As an organisation we have decided to capacitate the Civil Protection Unit (CPU) so that they may effectively operate the quarantine centre,” said Mr Muleya. “Each tent can accommodate a family of six people and in addition, we have brought 50 sets of non-food items to be used by distressed returnees. “The NFI kits include two pots, six plates, six mugs, one washing basin, two mosquito nets, one spoon, 30 aqua tabs for water purification, two packets of sanitary pads, one plastic bucket, four adult female pants, two child female panties, one laminated China bag and six bars of soap. “We are aware that among the returnees some will be vulnerable without resources, and these NFI kits will come in handy and the distribution will be done at the CPU’s discretion.” He said IOM will continue working with other stakeholders to minimise the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic. Beitbridge Civil Protection chairperson, Mrs Skhangazile Mafu-Moyo said the gesture by the humanitarian organisation was a boost to the district. “We are grateful to IOM. This will enhance our capacity to professionally manage the quarantine centre,” she said. “It is also pleasing to note that some corporates, commercial farmers and non-governmental organisations are coming on board. Recently we received 44 beds, 10 mattresses and an assortment of groceries from the Zimbabwe Revenue Authority (Zimra), fuel and groceries from local commercial farmers and TopPick Investments.” The donation comes a few days after Government procured food to feed 100 people at the NSSA quarantine centre.