The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
HEALTH workers in Matabeleland South province, which is yet to record a Covid-19 positive case, are set to undergo intensive training on how to deal with cases should the virus be detected. Addressing Government officials and service chiefs at a district taskforce meeting held at Insiza Rural District Council in Filabusi on Saturday, Minister of Environment, Climate, Tourism and Hospitality Industry Nqobizitha Mangaliso Ndlovu who is in charge of Matabeleland South Province under the Inter-Ministerial Taskforce on Covid-19 said the training programme is part of the national taskforce teams’ objective of decentralising the testing initiative. “I understand health workers in the province will continue with the intensive training in order to be prepared in case there is a positive case recorded. “The move is meant to also spruce up efforts of decentralising the testing measures to every province and district countrywide,” said Minister Ndlovu. Matabeleland South Provincial Medical Director Dr Rudo Chikodzore said the programme will be spearheaded by the Ministry of Health and Child Care. “Last week we did the surveillance train-the-trainer programme and this week we will be conducting the case management training to consolidate the information that has been already made available to the health workers,” said Dr Chikodzore. “We will start at a provincial level and soon after the training, the provincial trained workers will train the district personnel who in turn will train the ward health workers.” The provincial principal environmental health officer Dr Patrick Mirirayi said all health workers in the province will be trained. “The training program is also meant to ensure that the safety of health workers who are on the frontline in dealing with the pandemic is not compromised,” said Dr Mirirayi. He said last week they received 175 test kits with tests conducted and samples taken to Mpilo Central Hospital which all came out negative. “Last week the seven districts in the province received 25 test kits each and tests were conducted and all came out negative. “Most of the people who were tested are the frontline workers as per Government’s initiative of intensifying the fight against the spread of Covid-19 through introducing mandatory Covid-19 testing for people reporting for duty during the lockdown,” he said. The latest development is in line with a new strategy for testing for Covid-19 which was approved by the Inter-Ministerial Taskforce. — @mthabisi_mthire.