The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Premier Soccer League has no locus standi over any team playing under its auspices, as the teams are all members of Zifa according to Article 10 of the Zifa constitution, which also does not recognise the PSL. This emerged last week following revelations that the 2016 and 2019 Zifa assembly resolutions to increase the number of Premiership teams from 16 to 18 and make the PSL a member of Zifa were never registered with the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC) as required by Article 29 of the SRC Act. Last year PSL chairman Farai Jere revealed that members of the Zifa assembly had unanimously resolved to accept the topflight league as the 24th member of the national association. Zifa communications and competitions manager Xolisani Gwesela also confirmed the changes and that the SRC had been notified. But the SRC refuted ever receiving amendments of the Zifa constitution and said as far as they were concerned, Zifa is still using the constitution that was adopted in 2013. This means the PSL has no legal standing to take any action against teams playing under its banner because their membership is with Zifa. It also means the PSL had no right to hear the match fixing case involving Herentals. If teams transgress, it’s up to Zifa to sanction them and not the PSL. “Unless the amended 2019 Zifa constitution is ratified by the SRC, the PSL has no legal authority over teams. All disciplinary cases ought to be the baby of Zifa and any club with suspended sanctions imposed by the PSL must approach Zifa for redress,” said an analyst. Members of Zifa in terms of Article 10 of the registered constitution are 16 clubs of the PSL; national league (once established; the regional leagues consisting of Northern (4), Southern (4), Eastern (4) and Central (4).The provincial leagues consisting of Bulawayo (1), Matabeleland North (1), Matabeleland South (1), Midlands (1), Harare (1), Mashonaland East (1), Mashonaland West (1), Masvingo (1), Manicaland (1), Mashonaland Central (1) and the area zones (1) are all registered members of Zifa. The National Association of Primary School Heads (2), National Association of Secondary School Heads (2), National Association of Tertiary Institutions (2), Zimbabwe Women Soccer League (4), Beach Football League (1) and the Futsal football league (1) complete the recognised Zifa membership. The bracketed figures are the number of delegates each member is allowed to send to a Zifa assembly meeting in terms of Article 21.