The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
MOPANE worm harvesters are continuing to flock to different parts of Matabeleland South Province to harvest amacimbi in defiance of the lockdown order issued by President Mnangagwa. The President extended the lockdown by two weeks on Sunday. This has not stopped the mopane worm harvesters from leaving their homes, some in other provinces in search of amacimbi in Matabeleland South. Recently, police dispersed mopane worm harvesters from camps they had settled in Gwanda in different areas from Colleen Bawn Tollgate, West Nicholson right up to Makado. During this time of the year scores of people from various districts flock to Gwanda and surrounding districts in search of mopane worms to sell back home. They are now back and reportedly paying villagers to house them in their homesteads to avoid attracting the attention of authorities. Matabeleland South Senator Cde Japhet Dube said scores of amacimbi harvesters had swamped his farm. He said most of them were being dropped at his Jani Farm by vehicles coming from Mberengwa in the Midlands province. “Over the past few days there were so many amacimbi harvesters that were coming to our farms. But police were also active on the ground arresting them for violating lockdown regulations. So, it was a cat and mouse situation between the police and amacimbi harvesters. They were saying that they are coming from Mberengwa and some from Masvingo. We tried to raise the Covid-19 concerns with them but they said they were hungry,” he said. Cde Dube said the harvesters only left his farm on Monday after harvesting most of the mopane worms. In an interview, Matabeleland South Provincial Affairs Minister, Cde Abednico Ncube said mopane worm harvesters continue to come from other provinces in hired trucks and were now operating in secret to evade arrest. “As a province we have had a challenge of mopane worm harvesters and illegal gold panners that are flocking to the area. “The mopane worm harvesters are people that are coming from other districts in hired trucks. When they first came, they were addressed by authorities who advised them to disperse and seemingly complied,” he said. “However, they have continued with their activities despite the President’s directive of lockdown. They are now operating discreetly. Let them be warned that the long arm of the law will catch up with them. Police are conducting patrols across the entire province to identify such people and once they are caught, they will be brought to justice.” Cde Ncube said the harvesters must be patient and wait for the time when the lockdown order has been lifted. “They just have to be patient; in December we will be having more mopane worms and hopefully by then Covid-19 will be a thing of the past. “Illegal gold panners comprise both locals and people from other provinces. When they hear of an area with gold deposits, they flock to that place at night panning for gold,” he said. Cde Ncube commended people from Matabeleland South Province who had adhered to the lockdown and urged them to continue even as the President had announced another two weeks extension of the lockdown. He warned those who were flocking to shebeens in the middle of the night. Cde Ncube also urge people to desist from crowding at shops and loitering around. He said the lockdown extension announced by the President was aimed at saving people’s lives.-@DubeMatutu