The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
VICTORIA Falls’ Zifa Southern Region Division One representatives Mosi Rovers are scouting for potential alternative sponsors after the Covid-19 pandemic grounded the tourism industry which bankrolls the team. Being a community club in Victoria Falls, Mosi Rovers late last year embarked on a massive membership drive targeting the tourism community. The club’s chairman Martin Mhlanga said they had managed to get a significant number of members who had started paying subscriptions but all had stopped as a result of the Covid-19 outbreak and lockdown hence casting doubt on the club’s future sources of funding. Mhlanga said efforts are being made to identify alternative sources of sponsorship in preparation for the new season. “We have a challenge with payment of subs as the majority of members are people in the tourism industry which has been drastically affected. We are working tirelessly to find alternative funding to prepare ourselves for the new season,” said Mhlanga. He said the team had a good pre-season preparation period and is ready for the new challenge where the club leadership set a target of bringing premiership football to the resort town for the first time. The Try Ncube-coached team suspended training in line with the lockdown and all players are back to their homes. The Division One league season was supposed to kick off on March 28. “We are waiting for Zifa to announce new dates for start of season. As a club that relies on benevolence of the community, we hope that when this lockdown is over, the community will take two steps forward and continue to run with the torch. “Our membership drive was so phenomenal and it was continuing to grow until the outbreak of coronavirus. It is not a secret that we want the best for the town as sports tourism has a fantastic effect on the local business. The community was enjoying the style of play exhibited by the team and we promise not to disappoint,” added Mhlanga. Victoria Falls needs more sporting activities to add to the Victoria Falls Econet Marathon and complement the town’s tourism status with sports tourism. The team has beefed up its squad by adding a number of players from other Division One clubs.
– @ncubeleon