The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
COVID-19 is hampering efforts to mitigate against climate change which is contributing to persistent droughts and affecting people’s livelihoods. The onslaught of the virus has resulted in global climate change events being suspended as resources are being channelled towards fighting infections. The country on Wednesday joined the rest of the world to commemorate World Earth Day with commemorations running under the theme: “Climate Action.” In this year’s commemorations, the globe had turned its focus on biodiversity as a strategy to mitigate against the impact of climate change which has also changed livelihoods. In a statement to mark the day, Environment, Climate, Tourism and Hospitality Industry Minister Nqobizitha Mangaliso Ndlovu said Zimbabwe has not been spared from the devasting impacts of climate change. “Throughout Africa, we experience environmental challenges such as climate change, deforestation, improper waste management, desertification, water pollution and land degradation. There is an increase in drought, monsoons, flooding and famine. This has threatened people’s livelihoods and the livelihood of other animal species and ecosystems,” said Minister Ndlovu. “Climate change represents the biggest challenge to humanity and the life support systems that make our planet habitable. Forests are one of the most powerful tools we have to combat climate change and our attitude towards this resource can be the deciding factor on our survival.” He said post Covid-19 pandemic, the world should refocus its energies towards saving the planet threatened by impact of climate change. Minister Ndlovu said Zimbabwe and the world at large should not take climate change issues lightly as they impact on everyone. “After the lockdowns, we will see a greater appreciation for nature in many countries around the world. I’m sure we all are missing the things we took for granted, what we did not know we would miss until we could not have it, the open spaces; the green trees and we are realising the wellbeing and health benefits of accessing nature. “Earth Day 2020 could mark the year we stop taking the planet for granted. The challenge of the biodiversity and climate crises will still be there when the Covid-19 restrictions are lifted,” said Minister Ndlovu. — @mthabisi_mthire.