The Chronicle Mehluli Sibanda, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIMBABWE born cricket player who is based in the United Kingdom, Tawanda Muyeye has made history by winning the prestigious Wisden Schools Cricketer of the Year. The award has been handed out since 2007 and Muyeye, now at Eastbourne College, a leading independent day as well as boarding school for boys and girls, becomes the first player with Zimbabwean roots to collect the prestigious accolade. Muyeye joins a select list of those who have won the Wisden Schools Cricketer of the Year. Born in Harare, educated at Ruzawi and Peterhouse in Marondera, Muyeye left for England in April 2018 when he had just started Form Five at Peterhouse after receiving a scholarship to Eastbourne College. The 19-year old Muyeye joins an illustrious list of players that includes Jonny Bairstow, James Taylor and Jos Buttler that have won the award. Last year, Muyeye was awarded the Simon Green Cup at Eastbourne College for sporting endeavours in the Summer term of 2019. The player yesterday thanked Eastbourne College and his coach Robert Ferley as well as his parents for the encouragement. “So grateful! Thanks @CricketEbc @EBCollegeLife for the support. And my coach Mr Ferley @robferley and my mum and dad. Very humbling,’’ he posted on Twitter. Ferley described Muyeye as a greatly talented youngster who remains down to earth, thorough and with a desire to make it at the highest level. “Just to say, of course it’s his great skill that catches the eye, but this young man is humble, hardworking and has a hunger to play at the very highest level. Of course, he isn’t alone in that but today is his day in the sun with rays. Well done Tawanda, I hope you create many more,’’ posted Ferley on Twitter. According to leading cricket annual publication, the Wisden Almanack, to be published today, Muyeye is an all-rounder, but an attacking batsman first and foremost. According to the “Cricket Bible”, the right-hander made one of only two double-centuries in English schools’ cricket in 2019, a feat Muyeye also achieved in 2018, an Eastbourne College first. He finished with 1,112 runs at an average of 69.50 for the season, the third-most in the country. Muyeye at the age of 15 was one of the five non-travelling reserves for Zimbabwe’s 2018 Under-19 Cricket World Cup squad for the tournament held in New Zealand while he was still at Peterhouse. He is a talented sportsman who also made it into Zimbabwe’s Under-14 squad for the 2014 edition of the Under-13 Craven Week as a flyhalf. It would however appear that like many who have left Zimbabwe, he has no aspirations to represent the country at international level, with his ambition being to qualify and play for England. English county cricket club Sussex are also said to have shown interest in the youngster. Muyeye was eligible to play for Zimbabwe in this year’s ICC Under-19 World Cup in South Africa. Despite being in coach Prosper Utseya’s squad, he pulled out since there are indications that he could be pursuing a career in England colours. — Mdawini_29.