The Chronicle Business Reporter 
THE Expo 2020 Dubai has been postponed by one year due to the fast moving and unpredictable Covid-19 on countries around the world. Zimbabwe is one of the countries that was expected to participate at the Expo 2020 Dubai. Various sectors including upcoming and established brands had shown commitment to participate at the global event. It was hoped that through the expo, Zimbabwe would also take the opportunity to publicise the re-engagement drive Government has embarked on to lure investment into the country. Organisers of the event, Bureau International des Expositions (BIE) in a statement noted that the world was experiencing extraordinary times and in common with other stakeholders, more challenges are anticipated in the next few months as a result of the global pandemic. “Over the last several weeks, we have been working hard, both internally and in consultation with key United Arab Emirates and international stakeholders, to review the ongoing impact of Covid-19 on our plans and preparations for Expo 2020 Dubai,” BIE said. BIE said it remains firm in its collective aim to deliver a trade fair that is true to its time. “But it is clear that this is not the right time. While everyone involved in Expo 2020 Dubai remains firmly committed, many countries have been significantly impacted by Covid-19 and they have expressed a need to postpone expo’s opening by one year, while they focus on overcoming this challenge.” In a spirit of solidarity and unity, the organisers of the show said they supported the proposal to explore a one-year postponement made by the steering committee. “We will follow the BIE processes on making the decision to delay Expo 2020 Dubai,” the organisers said. The BIE will now work with its member states and Expo 2020 Dubai to establish a change in dates. A final decision on postponement can only be made by the BIE’s general assembly. The event organisers said they have always aimed to host a world expo that inspires people by showcasing the best examples of collaboration, innovation and cooperation from around the globe. Zimbabwe is an official participant in the expo under the “assisted programme” developed by the United Arab Emirates to support eligible developing nations, lower and middle-income countries. The Office of the President and Cabinet was spearheading the Expo 2020 Dubai, with emphasis being on how different sectors should prepare adequately for the event.