The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
AT 25, Quality Foods coach Loverty Mabunda is set to be one of the youngest coaches to ever lead a Southern Region Division One outfit. His playing career suffered a premature end due to injury and he immediately turned to coaching junior football at Santos and Street Set. Quality Foods gave him a shot at coaching in Division Two and he repaid their trust by winning them a ticket into Division One football for the 2020 season. The Tshabalala-based side also won the Zifa Bulawayo Province Cup last season to cap a successful campaign. Despite uncertainty brought about by the Covid-19 pandemic, Mabunda is still looking forward to making his historic debut in the second tier league. “Personally it’s quite frustrating to have to wait for football to start again, but this situation requires patience. It’s not going to be easy when the season starts, but we are not going to Division One to make the numbers but to compete,” Mabunda said. “The Covid-19 situation has affected us very much because there had been a lot of progress in terms of fitness and conditioning, but we might have to do it all over again. We are staying at home like everyone else. Players have their individual training at home.” He has kept faith in players that gained him promotion. The oldest player in his squad is aged 25 and he coached most of the players in junior football. New faces at the club include former Bantu Rovers striker Gladman Bharibhari, Brendon Dube, formerly with Zim Leopards and Bosso 90, as well as striker Tawanda Zinaka, previously with Mwenezana. Mabunda will go head-to-head with some of the country’s top Division One coaches. Reigning Zifa Southern Region coach of the year Try Ncube is in charge of Mosi Rovers in Victoria Falls, while Hwange FC have roped in former Highlanders coach Bongani Mafu. Former Caps United interim coach Mark Mathe will be in charge of Talen Vision, Dazzy Kapenya will lead Casmyn and Kudzayi Mhandire has found a new home at Arenel. With this line-up of experienced coaches, this season promises to be the most exciting campaign when it does eventually start. – @innocentskizoe