The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
A by-election to replace fired Zifa executive committee member Chamu Chiwanza will be held at the next Zifa assembly meeting. Chiwanza was booted out for not possessing the requisite five years football administration experience prior to his election in 2018. The holding of the by-election was confirmed by Zifa lawyer Chenaimoyo Gumiro yesterday. Chiwanza’s hearing was conducted on August 14, 2019 following a complaint by one of the losing candidates Stanley Chapeta who is the Zifa Central Region chairman. Chapeta came fifth with 34 votes behind Philimon Machana, Sugar Chagonda, Bryton Malandule and Chiwanza. Upon getting information that Chiwanza had misrepresented to the electoral committee that he had eight years of football experience, Chapeta filed an official complainant seeking disqualification of Chiwanza. Chiwanza had alleged that he had been a Conduit Football Club secretary general for eight years. The disciplinary committee chaired by one LT Muradzikwa, on August 14 disqualified Chiwanza. The accused person as appears from the charge sheet served on him on the 22 July, 2019(ex facie) was elected a Board member on 16 December, 2018. Prior to the election, member had vouched information that he meets the requisite five-year football administration as per article 32 (4) of the Zimbabwe Football  Associations constitution and that he had eight years as secretary general of Conduit Football Club. That information turned out to be false. It turned out that the respondent did not meet the requisite five-year football administration after one of the contestant Stanley Chapeta whistle blew to that effect. The terms of The disciplinary committee ruled that Chiwanza had committed fraud when he misrepresented facts that he had eight years experience in football after claiming he was secretary general of Conduit Soccer Academy. The committee held that this was a misrepresentation of facts as the said Conduit Soccer Academy denied that Chiwanza was employed by it or that he was involved in the administration of its affairs. The committee said Chiwanza was also guilty of bringing the game of football into disrepute in that he contravened article 60 of the Zifa Constitution which specifically prohibits taking football matters to the formal courts. It was found that Chiwanza disregarded this article and filed an urgent chamber application at the High Court against the association and its president. Gumiro confirmed that Chiwanza had been expelled from the executive committee hence the pending by-election to elect his replacement. Chapeta says following the disqualification of Chiwanza for misrepresenting facts that led to his participation in the elections, he should be declared duly elected. “It’s a fact that had the electoral committee done its due diligence they would have disqualified Chiwanza from taking part in the election. The disciplinary committee confirmed by its judgment that facts were misrepresented leading to his participation. I came fifth with 50 plus percentage votes meaning had Chiwanza not taken part, I would have been fourth and declared duly elected member of the Zifa executive committee, said Chapeta.