The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
NETBALL South Africa president Cecilia Molokwane has fully recovered from a Covid-19 infection after testing positive two weeks ago and immediately going into quarantine. Both Netball South Africa and Molokwane confirmed the latest development via Twitter with Molokwane, probably the only known sports personality to test positive from the pandemic in Southern Africa, reminding people that Covid-19 does not discriminate against race or gender. She urged people to keep exercising social distancing and also observe lockdown orders that most governments across the world have ordered. “Following my results my medical doctor recommended that I be in quarantine for at least two weeks before I can retest. It is such an exhausting exercise. However, it’s worth it to be in self-isolation for my sake and those close to me. “I have a three-year-old daughter and not being able to even give her a hug was a nightmare, one needs to be self-disciplined because the virus doesn’t move, however people do. This virus is serious and I see people not taking it seriously and it worries me. I will continue with my family to adhere to the precautions and the lockdown calls. Coronavirus knows no gender, colour, race, religion; whether poor or rich it will get you so for us to be safe, please stay at home,” said Molokwane. Molokwane had travelled to the United Kingdom for meetings with the International Netball Federation where she serves as a board member. The meetings took place as South Africa is preparing to host the next edition of the Netball World Cup finals in 2023. When news of her infection filtered through two weeks ago, Zimbabwe’s Rainbow Amateur Netball League (Ranl) was among the first to wish her a speedy recovery. Like in South Africa, Ranl also iced all their league matches in a bid to flatten the Covid-19 curve before a proclamation by President Mnangagwa to ban all public gatherings including sporting events in the country, Ranl had already banned hand shaking among the players and officials before, during and after their matches.