The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
DYNAMOS founder member and board chairman Bernard Marriot has rubbished as unfounded reports that The Glamour boys were mooting a sensational pull-out from the Premier Soccer League in protest over what they claimed was meagre sponsorship from Delta Beverages. Sources had claimed that the country’s most successful club had raised the red flag over the PSL package from Delta Beverages which they felt was too little compared to the mileage that the beverages manufacturer, through their Castle brand, was getting. “DeMbare are not happy and they want to pull out. At the moment they also want their biggest rival Highlanders to buy into the idea then other smaller teams will naturally follow. DeMbare wanted, from the sponsorship package, Delta Beverages to cover such issues as playing uniforms and quarterly grants,” a source had claimed to this publication. The same source said some ambitious Division One teams would also be approached in what would initially be a 14-team league with a mobile phone operator as well as a leading financial institution being earmarked to bankroll the league that would be called Zimbabwe Super League (ZSL). Highlanders chairman Kenneth Mhlophe recently told an online publication that the Bulawayo giants have no intention of breaking away from the PSL. In 1975 Highlanders pulled out of the then Rhodesia National Football League over ill-treatment and dissatisfaction with the national administration led by John Madzima. In 1979 a number of Harare-based teams saw the wisdom behind Bosso action and joined them leading to the formation of the National Professional Soccer League. However, in an interview yesterday Marriot said such talk is the imagination of enemies of progress as they were happy with the work being done by the Premier Soccer League. “I wonder where all this talk is coming from. People must remember that it was Dynamos together with teams like Black Rhinos and Chapungu that started organised football way back in the 1960s and if we are not happy with the way things are done in the league, we will approach them directly, why should we be cowards and pull out? “As Dynamos we are happy with our participation in the PSL,” said Marriot. He said, in what is probably a sign that the pull-out talks had been discussed within the rank and file of the club, that as a board they have four distinct duties. “One, we formulate policy, secondly we plan, thirdly we make appointments and disappointments and fourth, we have a final decision on everything and anything and if the executive is not happy with the PSL, they first come to us,” said Marriot.