The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
South Africa-based Maskandi singer Patrick Dube has bemoaned the Covid-19 pandemic saying it affected his forthcoming album which features renowned South African female Maskandi artiste, Bonakele. The album titled Unikeziwe was due for release during the first quarter of the year, but was derailed by the global pandemic. Dube said what was disheartening was that production of his second album was almost complete. “I’m currently working on my second album which should have been out by now, but was affected by Covid-19 as we had to put everything on hold,” said Dube. Victoria Falls-born Dube who uses stage name Singenzani Isosha Lika Maskandi, broke into the music scene in 2018 when he recorded a 10-track album titled Isoka Lakho which caught Bonakele’s attention. Bonakele Masango, whose stage name is just Bonakele is a familiar voice in South Africa. However, Dube said once things normalise, he would return to studio to resume work on the album. On his first album, the Chidobe Village boy collaborated with another Zimbabwean Maskandi musician, Zinja Ziyamluma from Tsholotsho. The song made it to Khulumani FM’s top 10 and Radio Zimbabwe Top 50 last year. Other songs on Isoka Lakho are Thumel’umoya, Ukuhlakanipha, My Thonono, Uyolala Kobani, Nomalizo Number, Akanandawo, Sukumani, Nginezono and Baba Usangikhumbula. Dube’s music fuses gospel and his themes are around social commentary and love.
Maskandi is a popular genre in South Africa with its fan base growing rapidly locally, especially in the Matabeleland region where it is associated with culture there. Dube said he joined the genre after being inspired by South African group Amageza Amahle. He said he markets his music online and through some agents in Zimbabwe, with his songs widely played on radio. On the Covid-19 pandemic, Dube urged his compatriots to abide by the lockdown rules to ensure an effective fight against the spread of coronavirus. “This pandemic has put every life on hold. Us artists can’t do shows or go to the studio where our lives belong which is frustrating but all we need to do is abide by our governments’ rules. “To help government, I’m also trying to sensitise fans on this pandemic online,” said Dube. – @ncubeleon