The Chronicle PREMIER League clubs are in talks to play as late as AUGUST as they look to finish the 2019-20 season and avoid missing out on £1billion. The 20 teams met for their latest video conference on Friday morning to discuss the coronavirus crisis. No Premier League games have been played since Leicester’s win at Aston Villa on March 9, with 92 matches outstanding. It had been expected some clubs would take the opportunity to suggest a June 30 deadline be set to bring more “certainty”. But SunSport understands that during the meeting, which lasted just under two hours, that was in fact NOT raised at all — and the season could run well into late summer. Clubs were shown potential scenarios for completing the campaign, depending on when the government gives the green light for a return. Teams face a potential £1bn-plus blackhole if the season is ended prematurely, with more than half of those losses shared between the “Big Six” who are the strongest advocates for playing out the season. The swiftness of the meeting compared to the four-hour session held two weeks ago suggests the League leadership under chief executive Richard Masters believes it has contained any rebellion at this stage. A Prem spokesperson said: “In common with other businesses and industries, the Premier League and our clubs are working through complex planning scenarios. “We are actively engaging with stakeholders, including broadcast partners, and our aim is to ensure we are in a position to resume playing when it is safe to do so and with the full support of the Government. “The health and well-being of players, coaches, managers, club staff and supporters are our priority and the League will only restart when medical guidance allows. “Today’s Shareholders’ Meeting provided an opportunity to discuss possible scheduling models. “It remains our objective to complete the 2019/20 season but at this stage all dates are tentative while the impact of Covid-19 develops.” All clubs now recognise and understand that even if the Premier League does resume, it will be with matches played behind closed doors. And the league and its clubs equally understand their concerns are not the ones that are consuming the country at this time. The statement added: “We are acutely aware of the distress Covid19 is causing and our thoughts are with all those directly affected by the pandemic. “In response to the pandemic, the Premier League, our clubs and players have provided vital support for communities and the NHS and will continue to do so after matches recommence.” – BBC Sport