The Chronicle Andile Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
POLICE in Bulawayo have condemned gender-based violence (GBV) cases and called for calm and harmony in households during the 21-day national lockdown meant to avert the spread of Covid-19. This follows the killing of a 52-year-old man allegedly by his 44-year-old-wife on Friday night in Emganwini suburb in a dispute over television channels. Ordetta Mpofu allegedly axed her husband Thembelani Mpofu thrice on the head accusing him of not reprimanding their ‘disobedient’ children in a fight over a television remote control. The incident left the community of Emganwini suburb shell-shocked. There has been a global rise of GBV cases, associated with home confinement, as many people are locked down with abusers. In an interview yesterday, Bulawayo police spokesperson Inspector Abednico Ncube called for Bulawayo residents to shun violence in the home at all times, especially at a time when people are confined to their households for the lockdown. He urged people to seek counselling if they were encountering problems and said police stations remained open for people who needed services. “As we are on lockdown, it is sad that we have to deal with the news of such a violent end to human life. Homes must be places of safety and refuge, one must be able to feel most at ease when they are in their household. It is unfortunate that someone has died,” said Inspector Ncube “We call for the public to desist from using violet means to address conflicts. We are all humans, we may not always agree on issues but violence is never the answer. Our victim friendly units are open, for both men and women who need our services even during this lockdown period,” he said. Inspector Ncube said police stations around the city had recorded cases of domestic violence although he said he was not ready with statistics. “We also urge the public to alert a community member if there are any problems at home so that they can assist or call police if there are challenges. We are still in our Easter holiday, a time where we should introspect, and appreciate life. As police we will not be lenient on abusers and we hereby warn all potential abusers that they risk spending some time under real lockdown in the cells,” he said. -@andile_tshuma