The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
MIDLANDS Province has received a second consignment of 200 rapid results test kits taking the total number of the test kits to the province from the Government to 400 in the past week. Government is supplying the rapid results test kits as it moves to test more than 40 000 people in the next two weeks to mitigate against Covid-19. Midlands province exhausted its initial allocation of 200 rapid results test kits last week after expanding the fight against the pandemic to remote areas. Provincial medical director Dr Reginald Mhene said to date, the province is still to record a positive case of Covid-19. “The province received an initial batch of 200 rapid results test kits before this batch of 200 but we are almost exhausting the kits. We are calling on the Government to swiftly avail more kits so that we expand testing to all areas in the province to mitigate against the spread of the virus,” he said. Meanwhile, the Minister of State for Provincial Affairs Larry Mavima has been on a provincial tour to assess work on isolation centres in the districts. Midlands has eight administrative districts — Gokwe North, Gokwe South, Kwekwe, Gweru, Chirumhanzu, Shurugwi, Zvishavane and Mberengwa. Minister Mavima who heads the provincial taskforce on Covid-19 said the province will leave no stone unturned to make sure that it is ready to deal with Covid-19 cases from the districts up to provincial level. “I have been to Shurugwi and Zvishavane touring the isolation centres for Covid-19 cases. I’m glad that we have companies such as Unki and Mimosa Mines that are working with Government to rehabilitate centres like the isolation centre in Gweru to make it ready for Covid 19 cases. So far, we are still to record a positive case of the virus,” he said. The provincial taskforce on Covid-19 has also been spearheading the setting up and equipping of district isolation centres to handle all cases of the disease in the event of an outbreak.