The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
THE Sadc Business Council has challenged the private sector and regional governments to work together in minimising the economic impact brought about by the Covid-19 pandemic. The organisation arrived at the decision following an online meeting held by the directors of the National Private Sector Apex Body and Regional Business Body Associations in the Sadc region held on 1 April. The meeting discussed issues around; the regional and national preparedness and responses to the outbreak of Covid-19 in the Sadc region and its impact on economies. In a statement yesterday, the body said it was critical for governments and the private sector to come up with interventions at the national and regional levels to minimise economic impact during the Covid-19 emergency and support quick recovery of businesses post the Covid-19 emergency. “The directors of National Private Sector Apex Body and Regional Business Body Associations in SADC note that Covid-19 has affected most Sadc countries resulting in national shutdown as of 1st April 2020. “They acknowledge the paramount importance of protecting the health, and safety of the Southern African people and, as the regional private sector, we commit and join hands with the governments to ensure that the business community complies with the measures to protect the lives of Sadc citizens and the global community. “Further, noting that the ongoing Covid-19 presents a significant challenge to Sadc economies, disrupting global and regional value chains thereby impacting business operations from supplies, production capacity, distribution channels and utilisation of resources,” read the statement. The Sadc Business Council also said governments should consider tax bailouts and exempting SMMEs from loan repayments for six months to enable business recovery. According to the statement, Central Banks in the region are also urged to lower interest rates to encourage lending and quick recovery of the business. In addition, the organisation called on social security/national governments to subsidise informal sector wages for six months and to consider putting together stimulus packages to aid business revival post-Covid-19 crisis. “We, the Sadc Business Council and our member federations reiterate our full commitment to supporting our respective governments and international institutions. “On-going dialogue with business, employees and their representatives on the scope, content, and implementation of extraordinary measures is essential to mitigating the negative impact of Covid-19 on employment and business,” read the statement. Regional governments have also been urged to utilise rail as a preferred transport solution to minimise human contact and quarantine dwell time during the movement of regional cargo. The body added that there was a need for easy visa facilitation clearance for truck drivers moving essential cargo across the region and to prioritise clearance of essential cargo freight at border posts and protection of drivers.