The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent 
GOVERNMENT has urged churches to assist in the fight against Covid-19 by offering some of their buildings to be used as isolation centres. Speaking yesterday during a Matabeleland South Provincial Taskforce on Covid-19 meeting with pastors from the province, Matabeleland South acting Provincial Development Coordinator, Ms Sithandiwe Ncube urged pastors to also assist through mobilising resources and disseminating information on Covid-19. “We ask you as pastors and churches to assist us as Government in the fight against Covid-19. We have noted with great concern that some people are not adhering to guidelines that have been set to curb the spread of Covid-19. Some people are busy harvesting mopane worms in the bushes, others are flocking to shops everyday ignoring the rule on social distancing. While the President has advised people to stay in their homes some are not adhering to this,” said Ms Ncube. “The police are on the ground but we believe as pastors you can also have some influence over the people. Can you assist by disseminating information to your communities so that people adhere to safety measures? If you have church buildings that you can offer which can be used as isolation centres, we would appreciate that.” She said churches can also assist by mobilising food for vulnerable people. “While there are programmes which Government has put in place to assist the vulnerable your input as churches will go a long way. There is also need for PPEs (personal protective equipment) which are in shortage in our health institutions. As churches you can come in with any form of assistance that you may have. Even vehicles or counselling services to the affected will go a long way,” she said. Ms Ncube also urged pastors to educate communities on the need to contact health institutions early when they develop symptoms of Covid-19. She said the province has been affected by a malaria outbreak and there is need for people to be conscientised on diseases and the ways of protecting themselves.
Speaking during the same meeting, Gwanda Pastors’ Fraternity chairperson, Pastor Othulani Mathe said churches were committed to assisting in every possible way as they are concerned with people’s welfare. He said they were however facing challenges communicating with some people who cannot access information on digital platforms. “As pastors we are concerned with the prevailing situation as we are concerned with the welfare of people. It’s also alarming that people are not adhering to the rules of the lockdown. The challenge we have as pastors is of reaching out to communities as some people don’t have smart phones,” he said. Pastor Sipho Mizha from the Brethren In Christ Church said while medical staff focused on Covid-19 there was also need for them not to neglect patients with other illnesses. He said hospitals have to remain open to attend to people with all other conditions.-@DubeMatutu