The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
A GWANDA man is on the run after he allegedly stabbed his elder brother to death while trying to stop him from assaulting their friend. Matabeleland South provincial police spokesperson Chief Inspector Philisani Ndebele confirmed the incident which occurred on Sunday at around 7PM at a bottle store in Guyu. He said Proud Siziba (25) stabbed Priviledge Siziba (28) once in the stomach with an okapi knife and fled. ‘’I can confirm that we recorded a murder case which occurred in Guyu area where a man stabbed his brother to death. The now deceased Priviledge Siziba and his brother Proud Siziba were drinking beer together with their friend at Buvuma Bottle Store. ‘’There was a misunderstanding over an undisclosed issue between Priviledge and their friend which resulted in a fight. Priviledge overpowered his friend and went on to kick him while he was lying on the ground. Proud intervened, retrieved a knife and stabbed his brother once in the stomach before fleeing,’’ he said. Chief Insp Ndebele said Priviledge died on the spot and the matter was reported to the police who attended the scene. He appealed to members of the public with information on the whereabouts of the suspect to contact the police. In another incident a man is on the run after he allegedly stabbed his neighbour to death during a misunderstanding in Fort Rixon. Chief Insp Ndebele confirmed the incident which occurred at Clemont Business Centre on Thursday last week at around 9PM. ‘’I can confirm that we recorded a murder incident which occurred in Fort Rixon area. The accused only known as Mtshifana had a misunderstanding with Khumbulani Mhlanga while they were at Clemont Business Centre over an undisclosed issue. “The two started fighting and in the process Mtshifana drew a kitchen knife and stabbed Mhlanga in the chest before fleeing the scene. Mhlanga died on the spot and the matter was reported to the police who attended the scene. Investigations are underway and we appeal to anyone with information that could lead to the identification and arrest of the suspect to contact the police,’’ he said. Chief Insp Ndebele urged members of the public to desist from resorting to violence. He also warned members of the public against carrying dangerous weapons as they have been the cause of a number of violent crimes. — @DubeMatutu