The Chronicle Freedom Mupanedemo A DARK cloud hung over the journalism fraternity last week following the passing on of one fine and promising journalist, Walter Mswazie (45) who succumbed to kidney failure while in hospital in Masvingo on Monday. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I am still in grief, pain and shock as I fumble at my keyboard to put up this piece together as I owe this dear departed colleague more than a mere tribute. There are promises and pledges which I made but never fulfilled until Walter’s death last week. He was a friend, a brother, an advisor and a pillar of strength as we trudged together in this profession called journalism. My first contact with Walter was in 2007 in The Chronicle newsroom when I was an intern. He was then a stringer with the Business Chronicle. I was struggling with my first story and the late Emmanuel Tshuma had helped me out with the introduction (intro) to my story before handing me over to Walter. He did not hesitate to assist and without even asking me my name, he started directing me on how to put together the notes I had typed to come up with a story. Our friendship started on that very day that he volunteered to assist me to write my first story for a national newspaper. I was soon to be transferred to the Midlands province and we remained in constant touch as we spoke over the phone almost on a daily basis. He would on many occasions tell me that I had a knack for human interest stories which inspired me to work even harder in that area. I want to believe it was through his encouragement that I excelled leading to my appointment as a sit-in Correspondent for Chronicle based in Gweru in 2009 soon after completing my studies. We would now as correspondents share our challenges as we both looked forward to being engaged as fulltime reporters. The two of us decided we should work hard and ensure as many of our stories as possible made it to the front page in order to convince the employers that we were capable. At times I would tell Walter I was getting frustrated by the waiting and his response was that a journalist is as good as his last story and we were therefore supposed to continue writing. He would even remind me that I was in a better position given that I did not have family unlike him who had to fend for his family from the little we were getting. I was later engaged permanently as Zimtravel magazine reporter by then Editor Isdore Guvamombe but unfortunately for Mswazie he had to continue as a correspondent. Chronicle changed editors from Brezhnev Malaba to Innocent Gore, Itayi Musengeyi to Mduduzi Mathuthu — all bringing new philosophy in the running of the paper and employing new faces but the job continued to elude Mswazie. We would discuss this misfortune and it was now my turn to encourage him to soldier on. Walter continued to file stories to almost every paper under Zimpapers stable in a bid to increase his income. In October 2009 Mswazie told me he was relocating to Masvingo so he could enhance his chances of being engaged on a permanent basis. I argued with him that he stood a better chance working in the newsroom where he rubbed shoulders with the bosses compared to working in the province but he was adamant that he had made up his mind. He said he could not stand the frustration of seeing people who came as interns being engaged on permanent basis by the different Editors soon after their graduation. Walter said besides the newsroom frustration, he decided to leave Bulawayo because he was having domestic problems. After many years in Masvingo, Walter informed me a few months ago, his intentions to wed his long time sweet heart, Shingirai Nyagumbo a pharmacist and asked about the figure he needed to put together to constitute a “reasonable lobola”. I suggested the figure and he indicated to me that if he failed to raise the amount, he would get back to me for some bailout. It fortunately went on well and wedding preparations started soon after. The two lovebirds walked down the aisle in February. Social media was awash with pictures of the wedding ceremony as Walter reflected on the big day. A few weeks after Walter’s wedding, I travelled to Masvingo to deliver luggage for a colleague who had found a public relations job with Masvingo City Council. I decided to surprise Walter but he did not pick the calls. Walter rarely ignored calls but on this day I just concluded that as a newly married man, he was probably busy enjoying himself with his wife. He only returned the call a day later and told me that he was not feeling well and was in hospital with a terrible headache. I was busy when he returned the call and I promised to check on him later. Iam feeling guilty because I never checked on him until I got the shocking news that he was no more. I am still in shock but your infectious smile and the legacy of hard work shall forever be cherished by those who worked with you. You scooped several media awards, a confirmation that you left indelible mark in the profession that you so much loved. Fare thee well, go well brother in arms, you did your part but the profession is poorer without you.