The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
WORLD Boxing Federation (WBF) middleweight champion Charles Manyuchi has donated $2 000 to help renowned Bulawayo-based boxing trainer Philip “Striker” Ndlovu (65) undergo a trans-urethral resection of the prostate (Turp) procedure after being diagnosed with prostate cancer. Ndlovu was diagnosed with prostate cancer in January and is appealing for at least US$3 000 to undergo the procedure. The Makokoba-based trainer expressed gratitude to Manyuchi and remains hopeful more well-wishers will come to his rescue. Ndlovu revealed his condition on Friday after failing to raise funds for the operation that had been initially scheduled for April 2. “I’m grateful to people who’ve been calling and asking about how they can help. This gives me hope that I’ll be able to get the operation done and beat this cancer. “I’m thankful to Manyuchi for paving the way and sending through $2 000. There’s a friend who also sent through $460. This is a good start. I need an equivalent of about US$3 000 for me to go for surgery,” said Ndlovu. “I’m appealing to fellow Zimbabwean companies to assist me so that I recover and get back to training those young boxers and give them hope.” Ndlovu, credited for nurturing a number of Bulawayo boxers, who include former World Boxing Association (WBA) Pan African heavyweight champion Thamsanqa Dube and ex-World Boxing Federation (WBF) Africa heavyweight title holder Elvis “Bulawayo Bomber” Moyo, has had a urinary catheter to help him pass urine since January. The trainer, a popular figure in Makokoba, is known for his passion for using boxing to get youngsters off the streets and has also been holding classes at the Zimbabwe International Trade Fair (ZITF) arena based ProActive gym. Since insertion of the urinary catheter in January, Ndlovu, who offered free boxing training sessions at Tshaka Youth Centre at Makokoba’s Stanley Square, has struggled to conduct his sessions. Those interested in assisting Ndlovu can contact him on his mobile number +263776125390. — @ZililoR