The Chronicle Nduduzo Tshuma, Political Editor 
AFRICAN Union chairperson and South African President Cyril Ramaphosa has called for the lifting of sanctions against Zimbabwe to allow the nation to deal with the effects of Covid-19 as the continent battles with the economic impact of the virus. President Ramaphosa was speaking during a virtual meeting of AU of Heads of State and Government with African business leaders on Wednesday to discuss the continental impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and the response to this challenge. The AU chairperson said in a number of engagements with world leaders and heads of international organisations, he made a strong plea for support for international assistance from our multilateral and bilateral partners for Africa’s Covid-19 strategy. He also reiterated the urgent need to lift the economic embargo against Zimbabwe. “Given the urgent need for medical supplies and equipment we called for international cooperation and support while increasing local production on the continent,” said President Ramaphosa. “In our interactions with international partners, we have strongly urged for the immediate lifting of all economic sanctions imposed on Zimbabwe and Sudan to allow them to adequately respond to the pandemic and save lives.” President Ramaphosa said he recently addressed the virtual Summit of the G20 during which he emphasised the need to ensure trade and investment flows are not further disrupted by measures inconsistent with World Trade Organisation rules. “I underscored the need for a comprehensive, robust economic stimulus package for Africa. This economic injection should support both the continent’s immediate humanitarian needs and place the continent on a path towards economic recovery,” he said. Addressing the business leaders, President Ramaphosa said private sector is a vital part of Africa’s efforts to combat the coronavirus and develop continental cooperation on stimulus measures to manage the economic impact of the pandemic. He said the Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government has met on two occasions since the spread Covid-19 into Africa where the leaders acknowledged the virus as an unprecedented public health disaster and that urgent action is needed to stem its tide on the continent. President Ramaphosa said they also agreed on the need for a comprehensive and coordinated continental approach, and that the AU, Regional Economic Communities and all health institutions should redirect their efforts to stopping the spread of the virus. He said they recognised the critical role of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention in the fight against communicable diseases in Africa in general and the fight against Covid-19 in particular and made pledges of $4.5 million towards boosting its capacity. “The Bureau agreed to the establishment of an African Covid-19 Fund to which Member States of the Bureau initially contributed $12.5 million as seed funding and called on all AU Member States, the international community and philanthropic entities contribute to this Fund,” said President Ramaphosa. “We also agreed on the need for G20 countries to provide a comprehensive stimulus package for Africa. This would need to include deferred payments and the immediate suspension of interest payments on Africa’s external public and private debt to create fiscal space for Covid-19 response measures.” Political Analyst Mr Richard Mahomva said the call for the uprooting of the illegal imperialist sanctions against Zimbabwe defies the neo-liberal justification and logic for the continued bullying of the Global-South by imperialist forces. “President Ramaphosa is positing an alternative to the demonisation of a fellow neighbour state and in the process reaffirming the whole region’s unity against Zimbabwe’s isolation. “Here President Ramaphosa ignited the spirit of the Dar es Salaam Resolution of 2019 which called for the declaration of the 25 October Movement as an entry point of the region and the continent’s displeasure with the colonial sanctions,” said Mr Mahomva. “President Ramaphosa’s anti-sanctions solidarities to Zimbabwe is also couched in reaffirming the recently celebrated four-decade milestone of sovereignty.”