The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
POLICE have arrested 2 885 people countrywide for disregarding lockdown regulations and warned people against travelling during the Easter holidays because the lockdown is still on. Easter holidays starts tomorrow until April 13 but the country is on a 21-day national lockdown which ends on April 19. President Mnangagwa last week declared a 21-day lockdown as part of robust measures to combat the spread of Covid-19, a deadly global pandemic which has so far killed more than 85 000 and infected more than 1,4 million worldwide. The lockdown is meant to curb the spread of Covid-19. A total of 11 people have tested positive to Covid-19, with the latest case being that of a 79-year-old Bulawayo man who succumbed to the disease on Saturday bringing to two, the number of people who have died of Covid-19 in the country. In a statement yesterday, National Police spokesperson Assistant Commissioner Paul Nyathi urged Zimbabweans to observe the Easter holiday in their homes to contain the deadly pandemic. He also expressed concern over an increase in the volume of traffic, with some vehicles being parked in central business districts the whole day for no valid reasons, saying such vehicles risked being impounded with owners being arrested and prosecuted. “So far 2 885 people have been arrested countrywide for liquor, traffic, opening of businesses, unnecessary movements and other miscellaneous offences. We have since intensified patrols, surveillance and roadblocks with a view of nabbing those who openly defy Covid-19 lockdown measures,” he said. “The nation is going to commemorate the Easter holiday from 10-13 April 2020 and at the same time observe the Covid-19 safety and health guidelines which were pronounced by the President, His Excellency, Cde ED Mnangagwa on 27 March 2020.” Asst Comm Nyathi said no movements will be allowed on the country’s roads during Easter except for those with exemptions. “The Zimbabwe Republic Police is urging all Zimbabweans to observe the Easter Holiday whilst at home with a view of containing the spread of the Covid-19. No movement of vehicles or people will be allowed on the country’s roads except those with exemptions,” he said. Asst Comm Nyathi also warned people with exemptions against abusing that privilege, saying they risk being arrested. “Those with the exemptions should also act responsibly and avoid abusing this privilege. Let us have zero road traffic accidents in terms of deaths, injury and the recorded figures of collisions,” he said. “Let us all be conscious of safety and security during this period and act responsibly in order to curtail the spread of Covid-19.” Under the country’s lockdown measures, all citizens are expected to stay at home, except for essential movements to seek health services, buy food, medicines, other essentials and critical services. The military has been roped in to complement the police to ensure that the public strictly abides to lockdown regulations that include maintaining social distances and self-isolating. — @mashnets