The Chronicle DURING the meeting or event
Provide information or a briefing, preferably both orally and in writing, on Covid-19 and the measures that organisers are taking to make this event safe for participants. Build trust. For example, as an icebreaker, practice ways to say hello without touching. Encourage regular hand-washing or use of an alcohol rub by all participants at the meeting or event. Encourage participants to cover their face with the bend of their elbow or a tissue if they cough or sneeze. Supply tissues and closed bins for disposal. Provide contact details or a health hotline number that participants can call for advice or to give information. Display dispensers of alcohol-based hand rub prominently around the venue. If there is space, arrange seats so that participants are at least 1 meter apart. Open windows and doors whenever possible to make sure the venue is well ventilated. If anyone starts to feel unwell, follow your preparedness plan or call your hotline. Depending on the situation in your area, or recent travel of the participant, place the person in the isolation room. Offer the person a mask so they can get home safely, if appropriate, or to a designated assessment facility. Thank all participants for their cooperation with the provisions in place. AFTER the meeting
Retain the names and contact details of all participants for at least one month. This will help public health authorities trace people who may have been exposed to Covid-19 if one or more participants become ill shortly after the event. If someone at the meeting or event was isolated as a suspected Covid-19 case, the organiser should inform participants. They should be advised to monitor themselves for symptoms for 14 days and take their temperature twice a day. If they develop even a mild cough or low-grade fever (i.e. a temperature of 37.3 C or more) they should stay at home and self-isolate. This means avoiding close contact (less than 1 meter) with other people, including family members. They should also call their healthcare provider or the local public health department, giving them details of their recent travel and symptoms. Thank all the participants for their cooperation with the provisions in place. — WHO