The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
After a successful training of filmmakers in Bulawayo and Harare earlier this year, facilitators of the training – MultiChoice have come up with another training online as they cannot travel to the different countries to conduct the workshops due to the Covid-19 pandemic. Liz Dziva, publicity and public relations manager of MultiChoice Zimbabwe said MultiChoice, through its MultiChoice Talent Factory (MTF), has launched a series of online master classes on its portal, offering exclusive access to practical skills workshops led by experts in the world of film and television. She said the online master classes which started last week would continue indefinitely, providing a boost to all film-makers, especially those in isolation or lockdown. “First up in the offering is Produce Like a ‘Pro’, a 20-module master class on production from pre to post. Anyone who missed out on the live MTF master classes in Zimbabwe in February will be able to catch up with these modules recorded to watch from home or anywhere,” said Dziva. “The Produce Like a ‘Pro’ series fills an industry need for easier access to training material, tutorials and related templates.” The master classes are available to those who registered on the MTF portal with newcomers being encouraged to also register so as to gain access to the free online facility. “What makes the Produce Like a ‘Pro’ series unique is that it has been designed as an A-to-Z package for tools and templates to equip new producers with the know-how to operate in this industry. From budgeting to casting, the modules have been created by Marie Rosholt, a highly respected pioneer in reality television who was executive producer of Big Brother, Survivor, Fear Factor, Deal or no Deal and other series,” said Dziva. The MTF portal was launched in March, 2019 as the third touch point of MultiChoice Africa’s MTF initiative, providing a pan-African film and television digital market place for information sharing on all related areas for Africa’s creative industry. The portal offers open and cost-free access to film creatives across Africa who can showcase their talent, access opportunities, stay up to date with industry news and expand their industry networks. So far, the portal has 25 000 registered profiles.