The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
THE refurbishment of a R10 million ward at Gweru Provincial Hospital into a state-of-the-art 32-bed ward for Covid-19 patients in need of ventilators is almost complete. The hospital is expecting delivery of 10 ventilators which were sourced by Anglo American Company, Unki Mines based in Shurugwi. In the event that the war against Covid-19 is won, the wing will still be used for emergency cases requiring special respiratory equipment. In an interview on the sidelines of the donation of truckloads of food items for Covid-19 patients and Frontline workers also sourced by Unki Mines at the provincial hospital yesterday, Provincial Affairs Minister Larry Mavima said the specialised isolation wing for Covid-19 patients is 90 percent complete. He said the hospital is turning into a world class health institution because of partners such as Unki Mines. The mine is also drilling 10 boreholes at a cost of US$50 000 in Shurugwi to improve hygiene for people in that district to mitigate against Covid-19. “Rehabilitation works at the male surgical ward turning it into a state of the art medical facility is complete. We are now waiting for the arrival of 10 ventilators. This project is coming alive following the R10 million cash injection by Unki Mines. Today Unki Mines has done it again and are donating food stuffs for the patients and the Frontline workers. This is indeed a commendable gesture by the company which is assisting the Government in service delivery,” he said. Minister Mavima said no Covid-19 positive cases have been recorded in the province so far. He said the isolation centre, once complete will be used by high dependent patients in need of ventilators. “We appreciate this funding from Unki Mines which is being used in the fight against Covid-19 and is coming at the beginning of the second phase of the lockdown. We know it’s difficult to run a family in a lockdown economy with everything coming to a standstill because production is down. So, it is gratifying to note that amongst ourselves, we can come together and assist each other. This is a positive attribute of human nature which has been brought by this virus. The gesture by Unki shows we value our Frontline workers tremendously as they are the people who put their lives on the line to save others,” he said. “With this illness at the worst you need a ventilator and we appreciate this big donation by Unki Mines which is aiding Government whose funds are stretched by this pandemic.” Unki Mines general manager Mr Walter Nemasase said Covid-19 is a big enemy which calls for everyone to put their hands on the deck to mitigate against the virus. “The world is under siege from this virus which is something different and therefore the need to come together and look after each other against this enemy. What is clear is that we are all in vulnerable groups as it is not easy to survive when the economy has been locked for such a long time. Those measures are needed but there are communities going on the verge of starvation. So, let’s think about those people and help,” he said. Mr Nemasase said they were providing food to 13 institutions in Gweru and Shurugwi including Frontline workers. “On behalf of Anglo American we are supporting 13 institutions that require support for the next three months. These include Gweru Provincial Hospital, Shurugwi female prison, Jairos Jiri Naran Centre, Shurugwi District Hospital. The idea is to make it easier for these people through our small contribution,” he said. “The food donation for three months and drilling of boreholes running into thousands of US dollars is part of our corporate social responsibility, assisting the needy people on our society.” Midlands Provincial Medical Director, Dr Reginald Mhene said Unki Mines is changing the face of hospitals in the province. “As a province we are still to get a confirmed case of Covid-19 but as a country we now have 28 cases and therefore the need to put our heads and resources together to mitigate against the virus. We will continue to be needing food, medication, clothing,” he said. Gweru Provincial Hospital medical superintendent Dr Fabion Mashingaidze said the new state-of-the-art facility will go a long way in improving health service delivery in the province.