The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
GOVERNMENT has urged members of the public to report unscrupulous businesses and individuals who are diverting subsidised mealie-meal to the black market. This comes amid a surge in cases of subsidised roller meal being diverted to the black market in cities such as Gweru and Bulawayo. Industry and Commerce Minister Sekai Nzenza said Government was worried about the non-availability of the subsidised roller meal on the official market. She urged residents to alert law enforcement agents whenever they witness corruption unfolding in their areas. “True, we are dealing with people and we want to cover the whole country, which is not easy. However, we do rely on information from the public to help the taskforce take immediate action. People must report such cases if they witness corruption and the law will take its course,” said Minister Nzenza. She said a Consumer Protection Taskforce has been set up and working very hard to ensure that consumers are getting affordable roller meal on the official market. “But there are unscrupulous people taking advantage of the situation and this taskforce together with support from the police are working hard to curb this corruption,” said Minister Nzenza. She said her ministry and captains of industry were also working on reviewing the status of companies or businesses that offer essential services so that there is continued availability of goods and services for the people during the lockdown period. “My Ministry together with captains of industry continue to review the provision of essential services during the lockdown period. The ministry would like to inform the public that the issue of the list of companies and entities that are exempt from strict lockdown regulations is under constant review as the lockdown period progresses,” she said. “These consultations with all stakeholders are ongoing and whenever there is a change in circumstances affecting any company or entities, the public will be duly informed.” She said working hours under essential services during the lockdown run from 9AM to 3PM.