The Chronicle Munyaradzi Musiiwa, Midlands Correspondent 
MINING companies in the Midlands province have suspended operations in compliance with Government’s lockdown directive. Some of the big mining companies that have suspended operations include Unki and Mimosa Platinum mines in Shurugwi and Zvishavane respectively. Mimosa Mine spokesperson, Ms Elizabeth Nerwande, said the mine has completely suspended underground mining until the lockdown is over while they have applied for a waiver to allow some of the surface critical activities to go on under maximum safety and precautionary measures. Ms Nerwande said there were other processes in mining that cannot be immediately suspended. “I’m sure you are aware of the Minister of Mines and Mining Development’s announcement regarding mining companies. As Mimosa we have complied with the lockdown directive and we have suspended operations. However, we have applied for a waiver to allow other processes that can not be immediately suspended and other activities that are very critical,” she said. She said there were activities that should continue to enable the company to resume production when the lockdown is over. Ms Nerwande said Mimosa was in full support of the lockdown as it prioritises the safety of its employees. Unki Mine general manager, Mr Walter Nemasasi, also confirmed that the Shurugwi-based platinum miners had also complied with Government directive on the lockdown to minimise the spread of Covid-19 which has seven confirmed cases and one death. “We have stopped operation in compliance with Government directive to lockdown,” he said.
Zimbabwe Miners Federation vice president, Mr Marufu Sithole, said small-scale and artisanal miners were also complying with Government directive. “We are complying with Government directive to suspend operations during the lockdown. Those that would want to continue operating have to apply through the ministry of Mines and Mining Development. We are waiting for their response on our application,” he said. Mining communities are regarded as high risk areas in terms of respiratory diseases due to the nature of their working environments. Most small scale and artisanal miners do not comply with safety and health regulations and usually operate without protective clothing. Most mining communities are prone to pandemics and operation “Chikorokoza Ngachipere” might have been timely as most illegal miners were arrested.