The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
FOLLOWING the death by suicide of a French team doctor on Sunday after testing positive for Covid-19, Bulawayo-based team doctors have reminded Zimbabweans in general and sports persons in particular that being diagnosed with the virus did not mean a death sentence. They also said it was critical to seek professional counselling as some might not accept their conditions due to their celebrity status. Bernard Gonzalez, a 60-year-old team doctor for Lique 1 side Stade de Reims, a team that Warriors midfielder Marshall Munetsi plays for died on Sunday as a result of suicide after testing positive for Covid-19. Warriors’ doctor Xolisani Ndlovu, Shepherd Khumalo and Mkhokheli Nyala who are team doctors for Highlanders and Bulawayo City respectively, advised players with underlying psychological and medical problems to seek help earlier, suggesting that the Reims doctor might also have had other psychological challenges. “The French colleague might have had other pre-existing issues that led to his suicide not necessarily Covid-19 infection. A lot of people have undiagnosed mental health issues and even depression which are major risk factors for suicidal tendencies,” said Ndlovu. He advised sports persons to follow medical advice on Covid-19 just like with any communicable disease in the event that they find themselves positive with Covid-19. Khumalo said Gonzalez probably needed psychological support soon after testing positive. “That is what sports persons will need. Gonzalez saw the natural disease progression of Covid-19 and couldn’t take it lightly. I would advise our sports persons to exercise social distancing, hand hygiene and avoid touching the face and this way we can minimise the risk of having this infection,” said Khumalo. Nyala said being Covid-19 positive was not a death sentence. “People need to understand that coronavirus is not a death sentence, less than five percent of those infected are likely to die. As for the French doctor, I think he probably had other issues that led him to commit suicide. “Meanwhile, we continue advising sports persons to observe lockdown and social distancing calls while also exercising hand hygiene and if they suspect infection, to immediately seek professional help,” said Nyala. As of yesterday, more than 1,3 million persons worldwide had been infected with Covid-19 virus with 75 000 deaths being recorded while 286 000 had recovered. Zimbabwe has to date 11 confirmed Covid-19 cases.