The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
ANXIETY gripped Victoria Falls on Good Friday after two foreigners believed to be a couple, were intercepted at the Victoria Falls National Park where they intended to tour the Rainforest despite the facility being closed. The national park which has the Rainforest and Victoria Falls, is one of the many tourist facilities that were closed when the country effected the 21-day lockdown to curb the spread of the virus. The Chronicle was told that the couple has been staying at a backpackers lodge in Victoria Falls. On Good Friday they allegedly proceeded to the world heritage site for a tour and a Zimbabwe National Parks and Wildlife Management Authority (Zimparks) ranger who was guarding the premises alerted his superiors who activated the Victoria Falls Covid-19 Taskforce after seeing the two at the park entrance. Police and health officials also rushed to the scene as there was anxiety about where the foreigners had come from in the face of Coronavirus which has led to closure of borders by many countries. Hwange District Medical Officer Dr Fungai Mvura could not be drawn into commenting about the issue as she referred questions to Zimparks and police. National police spokesperson Assistant Commissioner Paul Nyathi also said he could not comment on the matter as he only learnt about it from the Press. The two reportedly paid admission of guilty fines and were released. While Zimparks spokesperson Mr Tinashe Farawo said the two were intercepted before entering the world heritage site, sources said the couple was caught by a ranger after touring the Rainforest. The ranger had reportedly gone on a routine check around the facility and the two found the main entrance unmanned and gained entry. The ranger later found them at the entrance after the tour on his return and raised alarm. Mr Farawo said: “We can confirm that two foreigners one from Germany and the other one from France have been intercepted for attempting to gain access into the Rainforest in Victoria Falls.” Mr Farawo said the world natural wonder will remain closed until the end of the lockdown. “We are on high alert and the Victoria Falls entrance is closed due to the lockdown which is underway. “We understand the anxiety and hunger that our tourists have in wanting to view the majestic Victoria Falls but we encourage them to be patient and stay home for now,” he said. — @ncubeleon.