The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
POLICE have banned the sale of alcohol at retail outlets countrywide in the wake of the 21-day national lockdown to mitigate the spread of Covid-19. The ban was effected yesterday to minimise social disorder and allow retailers to sell only “essential” products during the shutdown. President Mnangagwa on Friday night declared a national 21-day lockdown to curb the spread of Covid-19. The virus has infected over 980 000 worldwide, killing more than 50 000. In Zimbabwe there are eight confirmed cases of Covid-19 with one death. Police have been deployed in full force to take action on retail outlets that fail to comply with the ban. In a snap survey by Chronicle yesterday, retail outlets around town had stopped selling alcohol, although the shelves and fridges were full to the brim. Liquor Hub along 5th Avenue and Fife Street, TM Pick n Pay outlets and Greens supermarket are some of the shops that were not selling alcohol yesterday. Bottle stores in Pumula South and Luveve were closed with supermarkets in the areas also complying with the directive. Our news crew also observed that at Cowdray Park TM Pick n Pay customers who had put alcoholic beverages in their trolleys were being advised to return them to the shelves and fridges. In an interview yesterday, national police spokesperson Assistant Commissioner Paul Nyathi said the measure comes as rowdy citizens are defying social distancing measures. “The lockdown measures were clearly stated and in light of ensuring that we fight Covid-19, there will be no sale of alcohol at any point in places like bottle stores and supermarkets. This comes as we have realised that people who buy alcohol at supermarkets are giving us challenges. They buy and drink as groups be it either in their vehicles or places of residence thereby defying social distancing,” said Asst Comm Nyathi. “Action will be taken on all those who will defy the order and sell alcohol at any bases. The police today (yesterday) started to take full action and will be visible on the ground throughout the lockdown.” He urged citizens to stay indoors to protect themselves and their families from the deadly Covid-19 virus. “People should take heed of Covid-19 and put their health first and that of every citizen in the country as the pandemic is affecting all of us,” he said. – @mthabisi_mthire.