The Chronicle Noel Munzabwa, Sports Correspondent
FORMER Chapungu United team manager Apollo Jurick Ntini has made a passionate plea to the Gweru City Council to consider prompt upgrades of Ascot Stadium to ensure it meets minimum requirements of Zifa’s First Instance Board. With Premiership returnees Whawha set to use the ground, it remains to be seen if it will pass homologation after failing the inspection conducted three months ago. The Covid-19 lockdown provides an opportunity to make necessary renovations as what is happening at Barbourfields and the National Sports stadiums. Speaking from Johannesburg, Ntini, who managed Chapungu during probably its best phase when the Air Force of Zimbabwe side reached the final of the CBZ Cup which they lost 0-1 to Mwana Africa in 2004, said it was deplorable that Ascot Stadium’s failure to pass inspection had now become an annual problem. Ntini cited the poor state of Ascot Stadium as a possible reason why two Gweru teams, Chapungu and TelOne suffered relegation after being forced to play some of their home games away from Gweru, which drained the two teams’ resources and energy. “It’s been a while since I last watched Chapungu in action, but information I obtained from the ground suggests the team was partly affected by the non-certification of Ascot Stadium, forcing them to play home matches away from home, draining limited resources and energy,” said Ntini. “It is my humble appeal to Gweru City fathers to consider renovating Ascot Stadium so that it meets at least the minimum requirements to save teams from perennial relegation, which has affected mostly Gweru teams. “The issue of Ascot Stadium has been left unattended for far too long now. Remember the stadium was almost condemned in 2005 when I was still with Chapungu and it had to require a re-inspection.” In February 2005, an inspection team led by retired Fifa accredited referee Gladmore Muzambi had condemned Ascot Stadium and a concession application by the Air Force of Zimbabwe, who had committed to upgrade the venue, was rejected by the council. Ntini also urged the Air Force of Zimbabwe to consider investing in long term leadership of the club, noting that a high turnover due to inevitable service transfers and promotions was adversely affecting continuity. “I feel the leadership turnover at Chapungu is too high thereby affecting continuity and rhythm which negatively impacts the team’s performance. This happens because of the in-service promotions and transfers.” He said it seemed paying winning bonuses and acquiring new players was out of the question at Chapungu hence their yo-yo performance. During Ntini’s time, however, they managed an exchange deal with Highlanders which saw Abraham Mbaiwa and Petros Ngodzo joining the Gweru side. They also managed to sign Cuthbert Malajila, Gilbert Nyakudanga (late), Tellmore Paruma, Blessing Mazorodze, Asani Nhongo and coach, the late Benjamin Moyo, which gave the team a competitive edge. Ever since his departure, Chapungu has been relegated twice in 2008 and 2019, which is a worrying pattern for a club that produced some of the country’s finest footballers such as Maxwell Dube, Phillip Marufu and Kennedy Chihuri, among others. —NoelMunzabwa