The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
In line with embracing technology to continue with their administrative functions, the National Athletic Association of Zimbabwe (Naaz) on Tuesday held its first quarter meeting via virtual platform, fulfilling a statutory requirement from the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC). The association resolved to officially suspend its calendar following the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic. Fifteen members comprising five executive committee members and the 10 provincial chairpersons participated in the meeting. On the advice of the International Association of Athletics Federation (IAAF), it was agreed that Naaz should prepare for resumption of their programmes between August and September. Tendai Tagara, the Naaz president, said competition organisers have been assigned to communicate with the sponsors and find out if they are willing to postpone their events to the end of the year. Already, the World Half-Marathon which was supposed to be held in Poland on March 19, has been rescheduled to September 7 this year, with the Africa Junior Championships and Africa Senior Championships moved to June 2021. The IAAF has also rescheduled the World Senior Championships set for USA from 2021 to 2022. “The most affected item on the Naaz calendar are the track and field championships. Naaz remains guided by Government through the SRC and the global board IAAF on what to do. Until then, measures have been recommended to follow and ensure that we keep athletes active at their homes with the national director of coaching Phakamile Lisimati charged with rolling out a fitness programme to athletes through their coaches,” said Tagara. “We need athletes to keep in shape and Lisimati will draw training methods that will make athletes follow from their homes. The athletes commission chaired by Olympian Cuthbert Nyasango will also be involved so that communication to athletes is easier.” Naaz secretary-general Cynthia Phiri was instructed to prepare weekly bulletins on activities, informing coaches and athletes about IAAF communication. Provincial chairpersons were also given opportunities to present their reports. – @ZililoR