The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
NINE suspected cases of Covid-19 in the Midlands province have been confirmed as negative after tests were conducted, Midlands Provincial Medical Director, Dr Simon Nyadundu said yesterday. In an interview, Dr Nyadundu said the province was on high alert and working with the provincial Covid-19 taskforce to put in place modalities aimed at fighting coronavirus. “All the suspected cases we have had so far, we had nine suspected cases and we collected samples on them and the results came back negative,” he said. Dr Nyadundu said all major hospitals such as Kwekwe, Zvishavane, Gokwe District hospital’s and Gweru Provincial Hospital had been identified as Covid-19 treatment centres. “All major hospitals in the province have been identified and wards or units there will be used to manage Covid-19 cases as and when they arise. We have other centres identified by the provincial and district task forces which are being assessed,” he said. Meanwhile, Gweru City Council public relations and communications officer Ms Vimbai Chingwaramuse has said Totonga and Ivene clinics will only be opened twice a week during the duration of the lockdown as staff from the two health centres have been seconded to other clinics to fight Covid-19. “Notice is hereby given that the following clinics will be closed on Monday, Wednesday, Friday and weekends during the 21-day lockdown period. These clinics include Totonga Child Welfare and Ivene. Rationale staff has been seconded to polyclinics to beef up response towards Covid-19,” she said. Ms Chingwaramuse said all those who need antiretroviral therapy, tuberculosis, chronic disease drugs and immunization services can access the services on Tuesday and Thursday between 9AM and 3PM. “All the other polyclinics Mtapa, Senga, Mkoba will remain open throughout the week from 9AM to 2PM. Maternity services are 24 hours,” she said. Council has been rehabilitating roads and putting road marks in the CBD and suburbs during the lockdown period in a move that has been welcomed by residents. “Service delivery will not stop because of Covid-19 so we have our employees on duty to deal with sewer, water, health and roads,” said Ms Chingwaramuse.