The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIMBABWE cricket and Tuskers’ spin bowler John Nyumbu is using the lockdown to bond with his family, while his brother Gary, a former cricketer, has discovered a “hidden” farming passion. Cricket programmes were halted last month when all sporting activities were indefinitely suspended as part of stringent plans to curb the spread of coronavirus. John, who spent six months playing cricket in the United Kingdom in the build-up to the domestic 2019/20 season, said he has been enjoying quality time with his family. “I grew up with my grandmother and each morning after my prayer session I eat porridge with peanut butter. This is a must to start my day,” John said. The national team spinner has been doing exercises, sprinting 30m in his yard to stay in shape. Because of available space in his yard, John also conducts coaching lessons for his sons Raphael and Ryan. They also play football to “kill” time. “I just finished reading Sir Alex Ferguson’s biography. I’ve been doing this in between my programmes. I have also been nagging my wife in the kitchen, asking for food because I love eating. “This lockdown has made me appreciate a number of things about life. The nature of my profession takes away a lot of quality family time because we spend most of the season playing in Harare. “Recently I was in the UK where I spent six months, so family time has been scarce. This lockdown has unlocked family time for me.” He urged people to adhere to all lockdown rules, stay indoors as much as possible, be as hygienic as possible and use this time to bond with their families. His elder brother Gary said he has started market gardening, which he will maintain even after the lockdown. He has planted spinach, tsunga, tomatoes, onions and green beans. “I’m doing watering and cultivation, preparing land for more crops I want to plant. Thanks to the lockdown, I’ve managed to take up market gardening and make it a business. Since I’m chairman of Bulawayo Business Opportunities, we encourage people of Bulawayo to take up these opportunities and learn from us,” said Gary. When relaxing, Gary compiles playlists for his clients, who know him as DJ Uncle G. He has also been playing cricket, tag rugby and football with his sons. — @ZililoR.