The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
SOUTH Africa-based Zimbabwean right-back McClive Phiri’s camp is “praying” for containment of the coronavirus so the Absa Premiership season can resume, as a premature end could have a financial impact on the player. Phiri signed a two-year performance based deal with South African topflight side Bidvest Wits in February and is set for a performance review at the end of the season. The fringe Warriors right-back has been training at home since the South African Premiership suspended its programme last month due to coronavirus pandemic. Dalu Bhebhe, Phiri’s business manager, revealed that the player is focused and not worried about the contractual implications and is instead concentrating on his fitness to challenge for a starting place when the league resumes. “It’s not a secret that his (Phiri’s) contract will be reviewed at the end of the season. The review is done based on the number of games he would have played. Remember, he signed a two-year contract and the review is meant to trigger some rewards. So we are hoping that once action resumes, he will be able to fight for a starting place,” said Bhebhe. “Remember that he had already featured for the club and is now concentrating on his fitness and we will take care of the administrative side. But all is good, there’s nothing to worry about,” he said. Phiri has been following the training programme given to him by the club’s technical team, which includes short sprints and aerobics for cardio exercises, squats and sit-ups. “I’ve been working hard to stay in shape. You know I think this break has given me an opportunity to work extra hard and try to get to the same fitness levels as my teammates, who were active in the Caf Confederation Cup,” said Phiri. “The club gave everyone a training programme to follow and I’ve improvised by getting some weights so that I work on my muscles as well. I do sprints, weights in the morning and then squats and other indoor exercises later in the days.” Before suspension of games, Phiri had been in Wits’ three out five match day squads. He made his debut in Wits’ 2-0 Nedbank Cup win over Chippa United on February 24, then played 46 minutes in their 0-2 loss to Supersport United in a league encounter. Phiri missed his team’s 0-0 league draw with Chippa and 1-0 win against Black Leopards due to an ankle sprain, before bouncing back into the squad to sit on the bench in the 4-0 Nedbank Cup quarter-finals victory over Real Kings on March 13. When league games resume, Wits, who are in sixth place with 38 points from 21 games, will travel to the Free State province for an encounter with Bloemfontein Celtics. The Clever Boys currently trail log leaders Kaizer Chiefs by 10 points. — @ZililoR.