The Chronicle Melissa Mpofu, Showbiz Editor
The Phiris – Lorraine Maphala-Phiri, husband Sonny Phiri and family – are certainly not letting the lockdown dampen their spirits as they are keeping themselves well entertained by partaking in various activities with the kids. In the process, they have come up with an exciting talk show that is promising to be a game-changer. The show which they have named Uncensored with Sonny and Lorraine, debuted last week on Lorraine’s Facebook page where it was watched by hundreds of people. Through this show, the couple tackles various life issues. What makes this show special is the fact that the couple has been through trials and has found a way to fix things as they are still standing strong. Also, Sonny is a pastor so he also tackles the issues with reference to the Bible. So when one gets advice from this couple, they are guaranteed that it is genuine as it will be coming from people who have experienced a lot as a couple. For a long time, Lorraine who was recently captured with South African television guru, Connie Ferguson, has always wanted to be a television personality so this show may just be a good stepping stone for her. Introducing the show last Sunday, Lorraine said: “So we’ve fought, laughed and now, we’ve decided we’ll play together. Lockdown has humbled us bathong! This is what we did after church today.” Thereafter, they rolled out the show’s first episode from the comfort of their home in South Africa. They discussed the issue of successful women not being married with Lorraine suggesting that such type of women intimidate men as they generally feel threatened by powerful women. Sonny also gave his input saying most of the successful women are feminists with the area of marriage playing a secondary role in their life. Those who watched the show also shared their views on the comments section. Impressively, the show had a good picture quality. This Sunday, the couple tackled the issue of submission and respect. Commenting on the show, Lorraine said she was amazed by the reception it was getting considering that when they started it, it was just a way to while up time. Below is an interview that Chronicle Showbiz editor, Melissa Mpofu (MM) had with Lorraine on the show that is broadcast on Sundays at 7PM. MM: Whose idea was it to have this show? LP: Sonny has always wanted to do a talk show and I suggested that we talk about relationships because whenever we talk about relationships, we both have interesting views. MM: Who comes up with the topics? LP: We both do and have since asked the show’s followers to also suggest topics they’d like us to discuss. MM: Who films the show? LP: We are using a home camera so a family member does the recording. MM: What’s your take on the show so far? LP: We honestly started this as something to push time during this lockdown, but we’ve been pleasantly surprised with the response and feedback we are getting. So so far, so good. MM: After lockdown, do you think you will continue with the show? LP: It wasn’t the plan, but we seem to be getting a few calls from production companies, so we’ll see how it goes. MM: So does this mean the show may soon be headed for the big screen? LP: By the Grace of God. Remember, like I mentioned earlier, it started as a joke so we haven’t thought of it that far, but if it so happens, then well. . . MM: Other than this show, what else are you guys getting up to during the lockdown? LP: Nothing much. We are really using this time to bond as a family, restrategise and home school the kids. It’s a lot really. MM: Are you guys now based in South Africa? LP: We are both in Zimbabwe and South Africa as we have business interests in both countries.