The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Business Reporter
THE business community has started mobilising resources to fight the spread of Covid-19 and Bulawayo based United Refineries Limited (URL) has taken the lead by releasing US$10 000 to rehabilitate isolation centres in the city. The Government has urged unity of purpose in fighting Covid-19. The virus has infected more than 700 000 people while killing more than 30 000 worldwide. The private sector has therefore heeded President Mnangagwa’s call for them to complement Government efforts to fight the spread of this deadly virus. Zimbabwe has recorded seven Covid-19 cases and one death. The business sector has been urged to desist from profiteering during this difficult period. Zimbabwe is on 21-day lockdown which started yesterday to try and flatten the curve on the spread of Covid-19. Most companies have been shutdown and people restricted to their homes except for those in essential services. Companies that produce food, medicines and other health consumables are however exempt from the lockdown. The private sector is also helping in producing sanitisers and masks which are critical in fighting the spread of the pandemic. Thorngrove Infectious Disease Hospital and Ekusileni Medical Centre that have been identified as isolation centres for Bulawayo and southern parts of the country, are under capacitated and need face lift. The hospitals do not have beds, linen and protective clothing for medical staff among other materials. In an interview, URL chief executive officer Mr Busisa Moyo said the private sector cannot be left behind in fighting coronavirus. “We (business sector) have an initiative that is countrywide that started in Harare but here in Bulawayo it’s called Business Fighting Covid-19. “We are working with Confederation of Zimbabwe Industries (CZI), Zimbabwe National Chamber of Commerce, Association of Business Zimbabwe and other local businesses,” said Mr Moyo. “United Refineries has so far contributed R175 000 or US$10 000 and we are also going to have our engineers helping us to set up here at Thorngrove Infectious Disease Hospital and Ekusileni Medical Centre, Mater Dei and Richard Morris,” he said. Mr Moyo said companies such as Edgars have pledged to assist with linen. He said everyone has to play their part as Covid-19 can infect anyone. “We should all be involved because Covid-19 is class blind. It doesn’t matter who you are, it attacks all of us. The factory, United Refinery has 400 to 500 people that work there. There are bigger companies in the city, we are calling on them to get involved,” said Mr Moyo. — @nqotshili