The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
AS the country continues to grapple with the lockdown which has led many to stay at home, Gwanda artiste, Master Zhoe, realising a need to comfort and cheer up people, has released a song titled Chelete. The party song released last week shows maturity on the artiste’s part as the musician went all out. He rode on the Amapiano beat as he wanted the song to appeal to many people. On the track, Master Zhoe also included Sotho and Ndebele languages. “Chelete (money) is a groovy track so it’s easy to catch on the lyrics and vibe to the song. The song applies to all situations – when people have money, are hungry for it when they’re spending it. “I composed the song with the hope to inspire people to be innovative and find ways to hustle in the comfort of their homes so as not to starve during this lockdown,” said Master Zhoe. He said the track which is available on YouTube was produced by X-Studios’ DJ Drumz and Dagger. Listening to the track, one can picture people in a party mood, braaing with friends/family and dancing. The song definitely gives hope of a better tomorrow where people will be able to do the things they love. Master Zhoe said unlike others who have taken the lockdown as a holiday, he has been hard at work, producing singles from his studio at home. “I’ve been working on tracks for my upcoming album from my home studio and cooking new beats. When all this (lockdown) is over and we return to performing, I hope to drop the album which will be a reflection of what people have been going through during this pandemic,” he said. If all goes according to plan, the artiste said the forthcoming album will have a collaboration with Winky D whom he is also planning to invite for the album launch in Gwanda. “I’m liaising with Winky D on a collaboration as I want to grow my brand by including him as he is a very talented renowned artiste,” he said.
Nationally, Master Zhoe has worked with Zimdancehall artiste Bazooka of the Umdala Wethu fame on the track Sanyeperwe. –@mthabisi_mthire.