The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
BEER drinkers in Gwanda have turned to shebeens as bars and bottle stores have remained closed since the 21-day lockdown came into effect on Monday. Shops that sell non-essentials have remained closed in the mining town since commencement of the lockdown. Ward 8 councilor, Ntutukho Ndebele said shebeens have remained a major problem in his ward especially in Phakama Suburb. He said even during the lockdown people are still flocking to shebeens. Clr Ndebele said the shebeens were a source of violent crimes as some people fight over commercial sex workers, among other issues. “The shebeens are still operating even during the lockdown. We have had a problem of these shebeens for many years now and there is need for this challenge to be addressed. Residents are greatly affected by these shebeens as these people will be making at a lot of noise disturbing people at night,” he said. “There are a lot of fights which break out in these shebeens and they invade people’s homes seeking refuge and at times properties are damaged. Some of the fights end in deaths and mostly it will be over commercial sex workers.” A Phakama suburb resident, Mr Mike Moyo said shebeens located in high density suburbs had become their only drinking spots. “Ever since the lockdown started, bars and bottle stores have remained closed leaving us who drink stranded. As a result, I have turned to shebeens which are located in the high-density suburbs for my beer supply. Sometimes I go and buy from the shebeen while on some occasions I go and drink there. “When we go there, we are cautious as police have intensified patrols and I would hate to be caught on the wrong side of the law. When we drink from the shebeens we keep it low and avoid making noise so that we don’t alert the police. The lockdown has greatly inconvenienced us as bars and bottle stores were ordered to remain closed. 21 days is a lot and it’s very difficult to stay that long without drinking beer,” he said. Mr Moyo said he normally goes to a bar at Phakama Business Centre but it was closed. A shebeen queen in Phakama Suburb who preferred anonymity said she was now getting new customers who were regulars at bars and nightclubs that were closed. “It’s still business as usual for me because people continue to flock to my shebeen for beer. They usually come at night although we have to be discreet so that we don’t catch the attention of police officers that will be patrolling the area. Some of the clients that are coming are my usual customers while others are new clients that have turned to my shebeen as bars and bottle stores are closed.” — @DubeMatutu