The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
RETAIL shops in Gwanda have recorded a drop in sales due to reduced business hours under the prevailing lockdown. The country is going through a 21-day lockdown starting last Monday following a Government directive for people to stay in their homes to mitigate the spread of the deadly Covid-19 pandemic. As a result some shops in the town close at 1PM while others close at 2PM. A manager at a local supermarket who preferred anonymity said fewer customers were visiting their shop ever since the lockdown started last week, resulting in a drastic drop in sales. He said there was high activity on days when they were selling mealie meal. “Ever since the lockdown started we have recorded a drop in sales as there are few people visiting the shops as they will be at their homes. We were also advised by authorities to operate half day and as a result we close at 1PM. This has greatly affected the business but we understand that the lockdown is necessary to curb the spread of Covid-19,” said the official. “Under normal circumstances our supermarket is busy almost on a daily basis but these days it’s quiet. We now only record a lot of activity during days when we have mealie meal as many people will be coming to buy it.” The businesses said they were hopeful that after the 21 days activity would go back to normal. A worker at another supermarket who also preferred anonymity said they recorded a high increase in sales after the lockdown was announced, a few days before it started as people wanted to stock their supplies in preparation for the lockdown. That boom in business has since dropped.Meanwhile, residents in the mining town have said they are struggling to get some of the basic goods as some shops will be closed. Mrs Ntombizodwa Maphosa said some essential products that people needed were found in the vegetable markets, which were currently closed. She said products such as vegetables and fruits were cheaper at the markets but she was now forced to buy them at expensive prices from supermarkets. “Gwanda is a small town with few supermarkets most which are small and we don’t have many options where we can do our shopping, therefore, we normally rely on vegetable markets for some of our essentials. However they are currently closed because of the lockdown, which leaves us stranded. The few supermarkets that we have at times won’t be having the products we need. In some days I struggle to get vegetables as they won’t be there at the supermarkets. “There are some products that we also need that are not found in the supermarkets, which are allowed to open during the lockdown. It’s also a challenge since supermarkets and pharmacies close at 1PM or 2PM especially when faced with emergencies. Yes we were informed of the lockdown on time but in my case I didn’t have money to stock my supplies so I have to buy some of the things as we go,” she said. — @DubeMatutu