The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter 
MOST South African Premier Soccer League clubs are embracing new information technology, using social media to conduct training sessions during the Covid-19 lockdown. The clubs, which expect to resume their programme once the spread of global pandemic is contained, have decided to think outside the box and make their players active during the forced break. Durban based Golden Arrows, home to the Zimbabwean quartet of goalkeeper Edmore Sibanda, left-back Divine Lunga, who is reportedly on South African champions Mamelodi Sundowns’ radar, defensive midfielder Danny Phiri and forward Knox M’tizwa, are holding one-hour online training sessions every day. Bidvest Wits, that has the Zimbabwean pair of defender McClive Phiri and forward Terrence Dzukamanja are also monitoring players’ progress through online training sessions. In an interview from his Durban base yesterday, former Chicken Inn captain Danny ‘Deco’ Phiri, who celebrated his 31st birthday on Wednesday, said the online sessions had helped him stay in shape. “The only thing we are missing is kicking the ball, but in terms of staying fit, the club drafted a programme that we follow and every day we train as a group from our homes. No one can cheat the process because there’s an app that everyone downloaded so that we conduct the exercises together. What happens is that all the players log in online, then the coaches also come in before we start our exercises. The fitness trainer leads the one hour sessions and the coaches will be watching to see if we are all keeping up. There’s no cheating and that’s the beauty of technology,” said Phiri. The Zimbabwe international said he has been putting additional work. Phiri’s teammate Lunga said it has been fun training as a team online. “There’s no time to relax and it’s great to train with other guys. Training online continues to give us that sense of teamwork and we maintain team spirit. When you train together there’s no time to relax and that keeps you on your toes,” Lunga said. McClive Phiri said besides following the team’s set programme, he has been doing additional exercises. “Being a foreigner gives you that challenge to push harder and put extra work because you know that there’s someone waiting to pounce on your position. Remember, when I got here the season was already at peak and I have been working hard to get to the level of my teammates. However, I have to be careful not to burn myself out in the process,” he said. Zimbabwean clubs that were preparing for the start of the 2020 season gave their players individual training programmes, but have not said how they are monitoring their progress. Some of the local Premiership footballers have confessed to having challenges in training alone and this could spell disaster for the clubs as they will have to start afresh once the lockdown is over. – @ZililoR