The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
POLICE in Matabeleland South Province have raised concern over cases of unlawful entry and theft from business premises which have become rampant during the prevailing lockdown resulting in loss of goods and property worth thousands of dollars. Provincial police spokesperson, Chief Inspector Philisani Ndebele said eight cases of unlawful entry were recorded between Thursday last week and Sunday. Seven of these were recorded at business premises. The police spokesperson said no one stood guard at these business premises making them an easy target for criminals. “As police we are concerned as there has been an increase in cases of break-ins into business premises across the province during the prevailing lockdown. Within a space of three days we have recorded eight cases and seven of these were at business premises which is alarming. Robbers are now taking advantage of the fact that some of these business premises will be closed and there is little movement from people as they spend most of their time at their homes,” he said. “Three of these cases were recorded in Bulilima Mangwe policing district, three in Beitbridge and two were recorded under Gwanda policing district. All these premises that were broken into had been left unguarded thereby becoming an easy target for robbers. These robbers were targeting grocery shops, bottle stores, shops that sell cellphones and tuckshops. The property that was stolen comprises groceries, liquor, cell phones electrical gadgets such as televisions and laptops, batteries, invertors among other items.” Chief Insp Ndebele urged business owners to engage security companies to guard their premises. He said alternatively they could visit the police station and enlist their services under the supervision scheme so that police could conduct patrols to check on those premises but would not be stationed there. Chief Insp Ndebele also encouraged early reporting of crimes and advised people to desist from tampering with crime scenes in cases of robberies.-@DubeMatutu