The Chronicle Tatenda Simango
Marcus Cicero, a Roman politician and lawyer once said, “It is exercise alone that supports the spirits, and keeps the mind in vigour.” As the shutdown is in place, a sedentary lifestyle (no physical activity) is the modus operandi most of us must follow. This article will enlighten the reader on the benefits one can get from moderate exercise, and it will give examples of the types of exercises they may engage in from the comfort of their homes. Exercise is bodily activity requiring physical effort, carried out to sustain or improve health and fitness. Exercise is done for enjoyment, improving strength, developing muscles and the cardiovascular system, weight loss or maintenance, and honing athletic skills. Proper nutrition is as important to health as exercise. When exercising, it becomes even more important to have a good diet to ensure that the body has the correct ratio of macronutrients while providing ample micronutrients, in order to aid the body with the recovery process following strenuous exercise. Generally, there are three forms of exercise:
Aerobic exercises — running, cycling swimming, brisk walking, skipping rope, dancing, playing tennis/ squash, long distance running. This is any physical activity that uses large muscle groups and causes the body to use more oxygen. Anaerobic exercises which includes strength and resistance training. Resistance exercise improves muscle strength and tone, which helps protect your joints from injury. It also increases your muscle to fat ratio — when you gain muscle your body will continue burning fat even when you are resting. Examples include push-ups, pull-ups, lunges, squats, bench presses, weight training, sprinting. Flexibility exercises stretch and lengthen muscles improves flexibility and range of motion, which can reduce injury. Improving flexibility makes exercising and everyday tasks easier by enhancing mobility in your joints and muscles. The beneficial effect of exercise on the cardiovascular system is well documented. Heart-related conditions will be addressed collectively. These include hypertension, stroke, high cholesterol levels and cardiovascular disease. There is a direct correlation between physical inactivity and cardiovascular mortality. A study of 54 clinical aerobic exercise intervention trials showed a reduction, on average, of 3.84 mmHg for diastolic blood pressure. Those moderately active have a 20 percent lower risk of stroke. Heart disease prevention programme would also include not smoking, staying reasonably lean and avoiding stress and depression. Children who participate in physical exercise experience greater loss of body fat and increased cardiovascular fitness. It is important to have your children “run-around” and play instead of watching television and play computer games all day. They exercise as they play, they develop their motor skills, improve their cognitive function and reduce the risk of developing all the conditions we are discussing. With regular exercise, disease is kept at bay and the immune system strengthened. Cases of upper respiratory tract (which would include Covid-19) have been associated with an over 20 percent decreased incidence. Both resistance training and aerobic exercise offer a strong protective role in the prevention of non-insulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes mellitus (up to seven percent). Exercise also helps control sugar levels in patients with established diabetes mellitus. However, one should have a meal prior to prevent hypoglycaemic incidents. Exercise also helps in regulating the digestive system. Surgical risk is reduced with exercise. Some studies indicate exercise may increase life expectancy. Risk of developing breast and colon cancer may be reduced by 10 percent. Furthermore evidence shows exercise may positively affect cancer survivor health related quality of life; less anxiety, improved self-esteem and emotional well-being. Degenerative (osteoporosis) and inflammatory (arthritis) bone disease is characterized by a loss of bone mineral density. This results in a susceptibility to bone fractures and health problems. It appears that resistance training and weight-bearing aerobic exercise may provide the needed stimulus for bone formation. Consistent exercise improves aerobic capacity, muscle strength, joint mobility, functional ability and mood, without apparent increases in joint symptoms or disease. Exercise has been proposed to have a pain-relieving effect similar to that of a pharmacological treatment for some people. Activity that has been seen to help is swimming and aquatic walking. Regular moderate exercise induces improved cognitive (mental processing) function, stress coping abilities, improved memory therefore improved academic performance. Short term exercise functions as an antidepressant and euphoriant long term. It generally improves mood and self-esteem. A number of medical reviews on depression have indicated that exercise has a marked and persistent antidepressant effect in humans. According to a Cochrane study; exercise is more effective than the psychological or antidepressant drug therapies. Yoga is documented to promote such effect. A 2012 review showed physical training for up to four months may increase sleep quality in adults over 40 years and also has been seen to improve sleep quality in people with insomnia. Libido is improved with exercise. Stretching before and after you exercise is important, it helps to:
Reduce muscle tension.
Increase your range of motion.
Prevent injuries to muscles and joints.
Reduce your risk of back problems.
Promote circulation.
Reduce muscle soreness. It is important to cool down, especially after vigorous exercise. The body needs time to slow down and it aids in recovery — meaning you won’t wake up as sore. Weight control, blood pressure control, general well-being is a great indicator to keep track of your progress. By getting 30 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise per day at least five days per week, you can derive the benefits mentioned above. Set a routine for your family that is enjoyable and manageable in your space (home/yard). A summary of the activities one can practise includes aerobics, stretches, squats, sit-ups, push-ups, walks, brisk walking, jogs, cycling, swimming, climbing stairs, vacuuming, gardening, yoga, play ball, Tai chi (meditation in motion). Muscles may feel tired or even sore after carrying out the exercise, this is normal. Exercise should feel challenging, but comfortable to complete. The more you work-out the more enjoyable it becomes. Until next week! Stay safe indoors and keep moving. Dr Tatenda Simango is a medical practitioner. He can be contacted via email 9thavenuesurgery@gmail.com or follow his Facebook page: 9th Avenue Surgery.