The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
TOUCHED by the plight of Thorngrove Infectious Hospital, Amavevane Sports Club has raised $25 000 that will go towards purchasing groceries for the medical facility as part of the fight against the Covid-19 pandemic. Amavevane plays in the Golden Oldies Social League in Bulawayo and used its wide array of members, some of who are based in the diaspora, to raise the funds, as the social club joined forces with other progressive Zimbabweans in the fight against the pandemic that has to date infected over 2 million people worldwide. Zimbabwe has 25 positive cases and three casualties. “This pandemic threatens the very existence of mankind and it knows no race or status in life, hence everyone must join hands and fight from one corner. Governments around the world cannot do it alone, hence the need for a collaborated effort from all of us. “Amavevane lives in the community, plays football in the community and when the same community cries for help, we must stand up and do the little we can. It doesn’t matter that the club is in Bulawayo and we are here in the UK, we are still members of the organisation, hence we saw it fit to organise ourselves too and come up with something,” said Mbusi Dube, speaking on behalf of the United Kingdom-based members of Amavevane and associates, who include Mduduzi Mpande, Ian Ndlovu, Sobantu Sibanda, Duduza Moyo, Joseph Sayi, Sithobekile Mathema Ncube and Zanele Sibanda. Amavevane was founded in 1994 by card-carrying Highlanders members and is the only social football team in Bulawayo with a clubhouse. Treasurer Clifford Ncube said the donation was to show that members had an appreciation of the need to be relevant to the challenges faced by the community they live in. “These are trying times for mankind and everyone must stand up. We are indebted to our members in the diaspora and the donation may be little to some, but I am sure to the recipient, Thorngrove Hospital, and our fellow brothers and sisters admitted there, it will meet some of their needs,” said Ncube.