The Chronicle One of SA’s biggest music exports Black Coffee, who got the country dancing for a good cause through an online party this past weekend, managed to raise about US$4 697 (R89 283.64). Born Nkosinathi Maphumulo, Black Coffee streamed his performance live from 9pm on Saturday to raise funds for the Solidarity Fund, which was established to fight the coronavirus outbreak. About 192 people heeded his call and donated. The award-winning DJ stated on his Facebook page that his goal was to raise about $50 000. According to his post, Black Coffee committed himself to a residency of livestream sessions to help fundraise and build awareness around Covid-19. He further shared a link for people to donate what they can afford. “I couldn’t have found better use for my music and my craft than use it to help fellow South Africans who, in the spirit of Thuma Mina, have stood with the President and stayed safe at home. “At a time of great uncertainty, I’m inspired by the resilience and commitment of South Africans. After weeks of isolation and reflecting, I’ve decided that I’ll commit to a residency of live stream sessions while fundraising and building awareness to aid different charities,” posted Black Coffee. “These foundations are in the fight against Covid-19, healing our loved ones, supporting the medical staff on the frontline and empowering freedom to live our lives to the fullest once again.” The Solidarity Fund was created to mobilise and coordinate contributions from all South Africans and members of the international community to ensure the most efficient and impactful allocation of capital is made available to cushion the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic for the most vulnerable members of society. Commenting on Black Coffee’s initiative, Solidarity Fund chairperson Gloria Serobe said: “We’re incredibly excited that the Solidarity Fund was Black Coffee’s choice for his live stream benefit concert. This is exactly the type of unity in action that the fund is looking to inspire and evidence that the fund is there for all South Africans to unite in the fight against Covid-19.” – Sowetan