The Chronicle Dumisani Nsingo, Senior Business Reporter
SMALL to medium enterprises (SMEs) should take advantage of the growing demand for personal protective equipment (PPE) and detergents following the outbreak of Covid-19 to increase production and boost earnings, Cabinet Minister has said. In an interview Women Affairs, Community, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Minister, Dr Sithembiso Nyoni, said SMEs involved in the clothing sector and production of chemicals should take advantage of the increased demand for their products as a result of the outbreak of Covid-19 pandemic. “We have called on SMEs involved in the clothing sector to start producing face masks because the country needs more than 20 million face masks. “They should, however, approach relevant institutions such as Nust (National University of Science and Technology), which have been given the greenlight by SAZ (Standard Association of Zimbabwe) to certify products for use in the fight against Covid-19. She said there is also high demand for sanitisers and the SMEs should ensure the quality meets the required alcohol content. Dr Nyoni said her ministry would engage the Ministry of Industry and Commerce to facilitate the setting up of satellite stations to certify PPEs and detergents manufactured by SMEs. A number of SMEs are already producing some of the Covid-19 materials such sanitisers, personal protective equipment which includes face masks. Dr Nyoni said Government has already identified National Pharmaceutical Company (NatPharm) as the sole buyer of Covid-19 materials. “After the products have been approved, the SMEs can then mass produce for NatPharm which buys on behalf of Government,” she said. Small and Medium Enterprises Association of Zimbabwe executive director Mr Farai Mutambanengwe said SMEs should seize this opportunity to improve on productivity and quality in order to substitute some imports. “Its an opportunity arising from a crisis but we have to take advantage of it to boost production and at the same time save the country the much needed foreign currency,” he said. Mr Mutambanengwe warned against producing sub-standard products which he said put people’s lives at risk. “We should appreciate the impact of sub-standard products on people’s lives hence the need to ensure our products are certified before release to the market. “There are many companies producing sanitisers but as long as these sanitisers do not meet the minimum requirements, they will put people’s lives at risk,” he said. — @DNsingo