The Chronicle Melissa Mpofu, Showbiz Editor
After her debut online lockdown show flopped last Friday because of poor network connectivity and sound, award-winning gospel musician Janet Manyowa came back stronger on Sunday as she delivered a flawless act on her Facebook page. Everything happens for a reason they say. And in Manyowa’s case, it was clear the show was meant to take place on Sunday not for the simple fact that Sunday’s are associated with worshipping, but because it is a day that Zimbabweans needed to be uplifted after receiving news that their lockdown, which was supposed to end on that day, had been extended by an additional 14 days. Naturally, people had mixed feelings with some hopeful that the lockdown would come to an end while others wanted it to be extended in order to try and flatten the curve during this fight against Covid-19. So when President Emmerson Mnangagwa made the extension announcement on Sunday afternoon, some peoples’ moods were dampened as this meant two more weeks with no public interaction. But, three hours after the announcement, a bubbly Manyowa appeared on people’s devices, ready to change their mind-sets with her lockdown worship in preparation for the next two weeks. Welcoming those who had tuned in at 7PM, Manyowa first apologised for Friday’s show. “I really apologise for Friday. We had technical challenges and we couldn’t worship together as planned. But, all good things come to those who wait. We’re here together and we’ll lift up the name of the Lord the best way we know how,” she said. Thereafter, setting the tone for her act, Manyowa first performed her 2015 hit, Overcome. From there, it was a journey like no other as Manyowa effortlessly got people in a happy space as she gave them hope of a better tomorrow through her different songs including Muchengeti, Zadzisa, Ndomira Pamuri, Inyasha and Ndimi. Concluding her set, Manyowa performed Nyasha Nengoni, a track which reminded people of the Lord’s love and mercy. Commenting on the show, most commended her for the flawless act with many saying she uplifted them. Manyowa on her part thanked the over 20 000 people who watched her set saying she appreciated the love and support.