The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
SPORTING associations have no excuse not to fulfil their mandatory administrative obligations such as holding general meetings during the Covid-19 lockdown, with the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC) encouraging them to embrace technology. Applauding the National Athletics Association of Zimbabwe (Naaz), which held a virtual first quarterly meeting on Tuesday, SRC director-general Prince Mupazviriho said they expect federations to follow suit and plan their programmes for the year. Naaz held its virtual meeting with 15 members, comprising five executive committee members and the 10 provincial chairpersons. The SRC said it had given sports associations a time frame to be compliant and if they fail to meet their obligations, the supreme sports body will not hesitate to descend on them. Zifa is among the federations that are still to hold their annual general meetings. Zifa’s is normally held in March. “I must say as SRC we are pleased to note that Naaz has taken heed of the message we sent out that organisations must use this time to put their houses in order and make sure that they are compliant. We will not be taking excuses when the time comes to act. Any serious organisation will make means to make sure that it embraces technology and hold meetings. The lockdown will come to an end and these associations must make sure that they are ready to roll their programmes out,” said Mupazviriho. Some of the associations that held their general meetings before the lockdown include Zimbabwe Rugby Union and Zimbabwe Volleyball Association. Mupazviriho said besides the meetings, organisations must make sure that they give their athletes training programmes to follow at home. At their meeting, Naaz resolved that its head of coaching and development Phakamile Lisimati liaises with the athletes commission as well as provincial coaches to formulate training programmes for athletes. The Sports Leaders Institute of Zimbabwe (Sliz) also praised Naaz for taking the lead in conducting an online meeting. “It’s commendable to see Naaz moving with the rest of the world and embrace technology to make sure that they plan for the year. The fact that Government prohibited gatherings of more than 50 people as part of measures to control spread of the virus doesn’t mean that sports stop. Planning is essential so that when the lockdown ends people get down to business. It will be folly of associations to wait for the end of the lockdown and start preparing for the year,” said Russell Mhiribidi, the Sliz president. – @ZililoR