The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo
BEING a journalist means you can’t entirely work from home even if you tried. Well, if you can, it can only be for so long. I often find myself outside my house despite the ongoing lockdown to slow the spread of Covid-19. I guess that’s why we’re considered essential workers anyway. As I was getting ready to go to work the other day, I found myself following my usual “dressing up” routine. Shower, comb my hair, lotion, pick something to wear and then do my face. I don’t really do a lot to it except a bit of concealer, fill my brows and some lipstick. Red, specifically. I’d like to believe that’s my signature lip colour. I absolutely love the pop of colour! But, on this particular day, I felt bad for wearing lipstick for some reason. It wasn’t like any other day. In fact, it felt like I was getting ready to go to a funeral where the self-righteous would consider wearing red lipstick as inappropriate. So, I actually stood in front of the mirror for longer than I usually do and asked myself — do I really need to wear lipstick? Who am I wearing it for even? I mean, it’s not business as usual. People are being encouraged to stay at home to help flatten the curve, thousands have died from Covid-19 across the globe and Zimbabwe is fighting hard to keep its citizens safe. I must have been a little depressed because if you really think about it, no one is immune to Covid-19. It gets scarier if you have to leave the house! The paranoia is brutal. You really don’t want anyone too close to you. The horror when they cough or sneeze! Anyway, while I was still lost in my thoughts, seconds later, I thought stuff it, I’m wearing my lipstick because it’ll make me happy today. Broadly speaking though, this got me thinking. Even when things are normal, who do we dress up for? Is it for ourselves — just to look good, or we dress up to be seen or to impress other people? We should essentially be dressing up for ourselves. To look and feel good. If anything, looking good is a great confidence booster — you’ll believe you can achieve anything! I always say this, you’re a brand and people will always judge you by the way you dress or carry yourself. You have to think carefully about what you want to communicate about yourself before leaving your house to go anywhere; before you buy that new piece of clothing or do your hair or make-up. Your clothes, make-up, shoes, hair — everything — is always saying something about you. If you’re a guy and don’t own at least one decent pair of shoes and belt, we know you’re a cheapskate. A good watch is another essential for any man who takes themselves seriously. Every woman needs a little black dress. It will go from work, to the club, to church, to a wedding — depending on how you decide to accessorise it. A plain white shirt is also essential. Pair it with a black pencil skirt or dark wash jeans and bright coloured heels and you’re set. If you’ve never thought of yourself as a brand, take this lockdown period to reflect on who you are as a person, what you want to be remembered for, your goals and how you intend to accomplish them. Think about the way you dress or carry yourself and how it’s an enabler or hindrance to you reaching your goals! Feedback from “The hair dilemma under lockdown” I follow your articles in The Chronicle. Always a great read. Love the way you write. Keep it up and thank you. Loved the Peter Ndlovu comment especially. — +263772815*** Ngaze ngamthola ovumelana lami. Short, kinky mfushwa hair is so cool. I giggled reading your article. I hope many will learn it’s not how much the crown is worth kodwa nje ukuthi kuyakufanela yini. – +35387363**** I made a pact with my hair to start taking better care of it during this lockdown. I am on a hair care regiment that has seen my hair improve tremendously. I wouldn’t have had time for it any other way. — @thwithakazi I won’t be taking any video calls. I hope you got your answer. — Millie I have fully adjusted to being locked down but my hair is driving me crazy! I’ve even thought about cutting it. — Zoe Until next week, flaunt your pattern and style and don’t forget to catch up with me on Twitter handle @PatternStyleZw or WhatsApp +263774492700.