The Chronicle Noel Munzabwa, Sports Correspondent
IN Nambya, Taboniswa means “we have been shown”, but for one Hwange-born holder of this name, the November 1997 career-ending tackle at the hands of former Highlanders’ star Gift Lunga (Jnr) at Barbourfields Stadium was unexpected. A soccer talent born from playing plastic soccer balls at Lusumbami Village’s famed Kambuwisa Ground, the gangly former Hwange FC defender Taboniswa Ncube still holds no grudge against Lunga 13 years later. Hwange prevailed 2-1 on that day, but the match also marked the virtual end of Ncube’s promising football playing career. Although he tried to revive his career after recovering, he was forced to hang his boots in 2000 due to effects of that horrific tackle at Barbourfields Stadium in 1997. “When Gift Lunga Jnr made a two-footed lunge, breaking my fibia and tibia, it came to my senses that I had never thought of something like that ever happening to me. “After the injury I said to myself it’s part and parcel of the game and moreover I was not the first person to break a leg,” said Ncube. “Although the injury was serious I never had any ill feelings towards Gift and I easily accepted his apology when he visited me at Mpilo Hospital. He was so remorseful and filled with guilt and I tried by all means to make him realise that it was all part of the game after all. “I made him comfortable in the presence of my family and team officials present each time he visited me in hospital, but I must say the club took great care of me from the moment I got injured until I recovered and went on to try and play for another two seasons before giving up in 2000.” Hwange had thumped Bosso 4-1 in the reverse fixture at the Colliery Stadium and Bosso were desperate to avoid falling to a league double at the hands of the coal miners and had revenge on their minds. With the tie delicately poised a 1-1, play was paused and the Barbourfields Stadium stands went dead silent after that lunge. While some called it gruesome, others called it a genuine mistake caused by the tense grudge match. Ncube’s career had ended at the age of 25, an age at which most players will be reaching their peak. His attempt at returning to the game was a futile exercise and it was surprising that the comeback even lasted two seasons. Ncube pays tribute to Hwange Colliery Company for not abandoning him during his time of need. He’s served the company for 26 years, 20 of then as a plumber after hanging his boots. Ncube had been catapulted into the limelight with a sterling performance in his debut match, the 1994 Castle Cup final in which Hwange lost 1-2 to Blackpool. Ncube started playing in the dusty fields of Lusumbami Village as a kid. He then went in to play for Wankie Secondary School, Ozopro and Processing in the WAFA Division. He broke into the Wankie Under-16 before graduating into the senior team at the age of 18 in 1993, but patiently waited for his debut in the 1994 Castle Cup final against Blackpool in Harare. — @NoelMunzabwa