The Chronicle Daily dramas, Uzalo and Isibaya are running out of episodes due to the national lockdown. SABC has confirmed that the number one TV show in SA – with an average viewership of 10-million – is running out of episodes for the rest of the month. “The SABC can confirm that due to the production of SABC1’s popular series Uzalo being halted as a result of the lockdown, unfortunately there is limited stock for this particular programme,” SABC acting spokesperson Mmoni Seapolelo said. “However, the SABC has put measures in place, including crucial engagements with relevant stakeholders concerning the organisation’s delivery on the set local content quotas as well as possible essential service permission for certain productions. It must also be noted that all our productions remain closed until a collective decision regarding production houses resuming work is made. Such a resolution has not been taken, however, when decided, it will be a decision based on not one, but all production houses.” Another show in trouble is DStv’s longest-running telenovela Isibaya that airs in the same 8.30pm time slot as Uzalo. The Mzansi Magic daily drama, watched by more than a million South Africans on average, is fast running out of new episodes to air for the rest of the month. An insider at DStv revealed to Sowetan that Isibaya is not the only show on pay TV that is running out of new material as local content starts to feel the heat of halting productions, especially after President Cyril Ramaphosa’s extended lockdown. Safta-winning telenovela The River with Sindi Dlathu in the lead and airing on 1Magic is also said to be running out of new episodes to air for the duration of the month. The fate of other daily dramas on DStv, including The Queen and Gomora, also hang in the balance. “Video entertainment production in South Africa has been halted for nearly a month, as the industry adheres to the national lockdown needed to reduce the spread of Covid-19,” said Yolisa Phahle, MultiChoice Group CEO for general entertainment. “The current lockdown is in place until May 1 and at this time we’re confident that we will be able to offer our viewers fresh episodes of must see TV. Any scheduling changes will be announced in due course, as well as being published on dstv.com.” Public broadcaster SABC and free-to-air channel e.tv however confirmed to Sowetan that all their daily dramas will air new episodes for the duration of April. “Productions including Generations: The Legacy, Muvhango, Skeem Saam and 7de Laan have sufficient transmission stock until after the lockdown thus, ensuring uninterrupted airing of episodes for South Africans to enjoy and importantly remain at home,” Seapolelo said.- Sowetan