The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
VICTORIA Falls-based Zifa Matabeleland North Division Two Soccer League debutants Discovery Masters Academy has set its sight on introducing girls’ football in an initiative aimed at producing possible stars for the national women’s teams. The academy’s director Ndoga Nyoni said they have decided to “spread” their wings by giving girls the same opportunities with boys. Nyoni, who coached the likes of former national team striker Tendai Ndoro, ex-Highlanders, Shabanie Mine and FC Platinum striker Tarisai Rukanda, Chicken Inn central midfielder Sipho Ndlovu, FC Platinum winger Gift Mbweti and Highlanders defender Bukhosi Ncube in their developmental stages, also intends to set up junior teams from Under-12s. “When we started in 2015, we had Under-15s that we grouped from local schools and played in invitational competitions. Now we are registering in Division Two to try and give some of the boys an opportunity to market and develop themselves. “Registering in Division Two will also help in terms of having a record of players that pass through our system so that we can claim development fees should they make major moves. I’ve been a coach for a while and it pains me when other people take credit for players that I groomed,” said Nyoni. Girls’ footballing talent was awash in the resort town and Nyoni’s desire is to identify, nurture and open avenues for them to play for representative national teams. With more than 20 years of First Division coaching experience, Nyoni has had stints with defunct Victoria Falls side Kujatana, Intundla, Zamalek, Zambezi Lions, NRZ Leopards of Dete and Amagagasi. His last Division One job was last season at Casmyn. “I had to quit Casmyn FC in Turk Mine to come back home and concentrate on junior development. Presently, I’m being assisted by Innocent Keane Mudenda. There are some former Victoria Falls footballers in South Africa who have pledged to chip in to help the project. There are also local guys like Edward Ganga also assisting. We are appealing to well-wishers in the tourism sector to assist us to properly affiliate with Zifa Matabeleland North,” said Nyoni. — @ZililoR.