The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili and Mashudu Netsianda, Chronicle Reporters THE year 2019, which ended yesterday, was bustling and eventful for Zimbabwe as it was largely filled with moments that can be best defined as bad, good and ugly. Chronicle takes a peek into some of those flashes that characterised the year gone by. January — The year started on a sad note when one of the country’s most loved international music icons Oliver “Tuku” Mtukudzi passed on. Superstar Mtukudzi died on January 23 at the age of 66. He succumbed to a long battle with diabetes at Avenues Clinic in Harare. The legend was declared a national hero in recognition of his works and contribution to the country’s music and arts industry. In his condolence message, President Mnangagwa described Mtukudzi as a man of humble character, affable and engaging in his own way through his Tuku Music, adding that he was an expression of Zimbabwean identity. “It was with a deep sense of shock and great sadness that I learnt of the death of our very own legendary musician and artist, Dr Oliver Mtukudzi, who died at the Avenues Clinic, Harare, this afternoon. An international icon, the late Dr Mtukudzi has been our cultural ambassador throughout his illustrious musical career raising our national flag high wherever he went to perform here at home, on the African continent and throughout the world,” he said. “He was an expression of Zimbabwean identity, a man of humble character, affable and engaging in his own way through Tuku Music. The whole Nation is all the poorer with his passing on.” The country was plunged into chaos when MDC Alliance and its sympathisers the Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions and their civil society allies engaged in acts of violent protests that saw some people, including a police officer, losing their lives and public infrastructure being destroyed costing the country millions of dollars. Constable Alexio Maune (32), who was based at Entumbane Police Station, later died on admission to the United Bulawayo Hospitals (UBH) after being left for dead by violent protestors who stoned him during an orgy of violence that left a very big scar on the country’s conscience. A detailed report by the Government revealed that 78 police officers were injured while one was killed in the line of duty during the violent protests instigated by the opposition party. The statistics reveal that the officers sustained various degrees of injury as violent thugs set on them in incidents that also included storming of police stations and attacks on officers maintaining order. The violent demonstrations were timed to besmirch Zimbabwe’s human rights image at a time President Mnangagwa was on a five-nation tour of Eurasia and Switzerland. The President was forced to cut short his international re-engagements efforts in Europe and returned home to attend to the situation in the country in the wake of the violent protests. President Mnangagwa establishes a 26-member Presidential Advisory Council (PAC) to advise and assist him in formulating key economic policies and strategies that advance Vision 2030. – February — the Government introduces Zupco buses for urban commuters to cushion them from profiteering private sector players. Former Cabinet Minister and Zanu-PF provincial chairman for Bulawayo Professor Callistus Ndlovu dies and is declared a national hero. Banks commence trading in foreign currency at a rate of 2,5 to the United States dollar following the decision by the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ) to float the currency. Teachers call off strike to give dialogue with Government a chance. Political Actors Dialogue (Polad), a platform for political parties that fielded presidential candidates in the 2018 harmonised elections, is set up. – March — Three foreigners die following xenophobic attacks in South Africa that left thousands displaced, among them, Zimbabweans. – April — Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni officiates at the 60th edition of the Zimbabwe International Trade Fair (ZITF) in Bulawayo and reaffirms his support for the removal of illegal sanctions against Zimbabwe. He says the imposition of sanctions is an act of cowardice. President Mnangagwa encourages the nation to openly debate Gukurahundi. He says the issue should have been resolved long back. Tropical Cyclone Idai ravages the eastern part of Zimbabwe, Malawi and Mozambique and many lives are lost. Sadc declares Cyclone Idai a regional disaster and launches a US$3,2 million regional humanitarian appeal to support the victims. Tropical Cyclone Idai hits Zimbabwe leaves trail of destruction in Chimanimani and Chipinge. President Mnangagwa declares two days of national mourning for the victims of Cyclone Idai. He holds frank and robust discussions with Matabeleland civil society groups at the State House in Bulawayo. He stresses the need for national cohesion and collective efforts in taking the country forward. The President dissolves the Zanu-PF Harare and Bulawayo provincial structures. Government avails a $19,6 million loan facility for shops that were looted during the January protests in Bulawayo. – May — Struggle icon and former Home Affairs Minister Dr Dumiso Dabengwa dies en-route to Zimbabwe from India where he underwent a month-long treatment. He is declared a national hero and buried at a family graveyard in Ntabazinduna on June 1. Former Zipra cadre Cde Velaphi Ncube dies and is declared a national hero. He is buried at the National Heroes’ Acre. Police start implementing recommendations made by the commission of inquiry into the August 1, 2018 post-election violence that was chaired by former South Africa President Kgalema Motlanthe. -A Good Samaritan returns US$100 000 to a security company whose cash in transit vehicle had been involved in a fatal accident near Lupane. – July — Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission (Zacc) arrests Environment, Tourism and Hospital Industry Minister, Prisca Mupfumira, on corruption allegations involving $95 million. Vice-President Constantino Chiwenga leaves South Africa, where he was receiving treatment, for China for further medical tests. Bulawayo Deputy Mayor Tinashe Kambarami and his sidekick Silas Chigora illegally eject Town Clerk Mr Christopher Dube from office. – August — Ntabazinduna Chief Nhlanhla Ndiweni gets 18 months in prison following his conviction together with his 23 subjects for destroying a villager’s property in Ntabazinduna. Police issue a prohibition order barring MDC Alliance from conducting illegal violent protests across the country. Former Vice President, Phelekezela Mphoko, is on the run after dramatically fleeing from Zacc officers who were set to arrest him in Bulawayo. Sadc heads declare October 25 as Solidarity Day against illegal sanctions imposed on Zimbabwe. Government investigates alleged human rights violations following the “abduction and torture” of members of the public by unknown people. President Mnangagwa fires incarcerated Mupfumira saying her conduct was not in line with what is expected from a Government minister. Government concludes negotiations with South Africa’s power utility, Eskom that will see the country receiving 400 MW of electricity while paying US$890 000 weekly to service the country’s legacy debt. President Mnangagwa declares the 2018/2019 El-Nino-induced drought a State of National Disaster, paving way for the launch of the Revised Zimbabwe Humanitarian Appeal of nearly US$330 million. – September — Former President Robert Mugabe dies at Gleneagles Hospital in Singapore on September 6 and is declared a national hero. He is buried three weeks later at his rural home in Zvimba despite the family having initially agreed to have him interred at the National Heroes Acre in Harare. His sons, Robert Jnr and Chatunga agreed the site of the mausoleum, and building began —  only for the plan to be changed again. – October — Sadc holds the historic anti-sanctions solidarity march with Zimbabwe on October 25. President Mnangagwa addresses Zimbabweans who gathered at the National Sports Stadium for the anti- sanctions solidarity march. He says the illegal sanctions imposed on the country by the West have brought untold suffering to ordinary people and their impact has also affected neighbouring countries. The Zimbabwe Human Rights Commission (ZHRC) pledges to address the issue of lack of documentation of people, particularly in the Matabeleland region, by the end of 2020. The Labour Court declared the 40-day long industrial action by doctors unlawful and ordered them to return to work within 48 hours. The Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe has banned with immediate effect all cash-in, cash-out and cash-back transactions, which were used by some dealers to extort cash from members of the public. – November — Bulawayo water crisis worsens as city records 96 hours of water shedding as it also introduces a big flush to curb sewer pipe bursts. President Mnangagwa reshuffles his Cabinet replacing Mupfumira. VP Chiwenga returns from China where he was receiving treatment. Finance and Economic Development Minister Professor Mthuli Ncube announces the 2020 budget, shifting from austerity to productivity. Government introduces new bank notes and coins. Government fires 77 striking doctors after finding them guilty of absenteeism. The Health Service Board said the doctors have since been discharged from public service following disciplinary hearings which the doctors absconded from. President Mnangagwa, after a meeting with Catholic bishops, issues a 48-hour moratorium allowing dismissed doctors to resume duty without reapplying for their posts. A deadly combination of hunger, drought and water scarcity is plaguing rural communities in Matabeleland North and South provinces with chiefs saying the situation is dire in some areas. – December — Former South Africa president Cde Thabo Mbeki jets into the country as he promises to assist Zimbabwe address some of its problems. Controversial Chief Felix Nhlanhla Ndiweni is stripped of his chieftaincy and all Government benefits accruing to him by virtue of the position following a recommendation by Cabinet and the Matabeleland North Provincial Assembly of Chiefs. Marry Chiwenga, the estranged wife to VP Chiwenga, is arrested for illegally externalising more than US$1 million in eight months. She also faces fraud charges after allegedly plotting to solemnise a marriage between herself and the VP without his knowledge while he was bed-ridden Government’s subsidy on roller mealie comes into effect to cushion the public against high prices. However, the mealie meal remained in short supply as unscrupulous residents were hoarding the commodity for profiteering reasons. — @mashnets@nqotshili