The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter MATABELELAND North Province has a lot to learn from Namibia’s Omaheke Region and hopes to unlock its potential to develop through partnerships, the Provincial Affairs Minister Richard Moyo said yesterday. In an interview Minister Moyo said the two provinces signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) early last month. He said Matabeleland North also has a lot to offer to the Namibian region. “The MoU will enhance cooperation and trade between the two provinces in a number of socio-economic areas. It automatically removes barriers to trade between the two while people from the Matabeleland North who are working in Namibia will find it easy to renew their permits after their expiry every five years,” said Minister Moyo. He said both Matabeleland North and Omaheke region boast of livestock production but under different conditions. “Namibia is dry but our farmers will benefit from their farmers. “They have good breeds which we can import while we can also learn to make stockfeed as they have a viable baling industry,” said Minister Moyo. He said the MoU will promote skills exchange where experts in various sectors will be sent to either country in reciprocal visits. Namibia will also be sending students to Lupane State University. Ahead of the signing of the MoU, Minister Moyo led a delegation of local authorities’ executives, Government officials and other stakeholders on fact finding mission to Namibia which was reciprocated by their counterparts in September. Agriculture, tourism, education and consultancy were identified as some of the key areas of cooperation. Minister Moyo and his Omaheke Region counterpart Governor Festus Tulonga Ueitele signed the MoU in Namibia. Minister Moyo said the agreement was a demonstration of close historic ties between the two countries. Zimbabwe Ambassador to Namibia Mrs Rosina Chikava and Namibian Ambassador to Zimbabwe Mrs Balbina Daes Piennar witnessed the signing. Mrs Chikava challenged both parties to speedily implement the agreement for the benefit of the two countries. “Let’s set timelines and not let the agreement gather dust but transform it into tangible results that can improve the livelihoods of our people. “Our bond that was born from the blood that watered our liberation is now being cemented by economic, cultural, agricultural and trade developments that are going to be realised through twinning,” said Mrs Chikava. — @ncubeleon