The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief THE Government has to date released more than $60 million to the Midlands in devolution funds for the implementation of development projects in the province. In an interview yesterday, Midlands Provincial Development Co-ordinator, Mr Abiot Maronge, said the amount is more than double the figure of ZW$23 million which local authorities received at the end of November. He said central Government will continue revising upwards the funds so that they correspond with the prevailing economic challenges. “On Inter-Governmental Fiscal Transfers, please note that the Midlands Province has since received a total of ZW$69 796 035.00. The amount has been disbursed to all the 14 local authorities for implementation of projects,” he said. Mr Maronge said local authorities have made significant progress since they started receiving devolution funds through implementation of people centred projects that are focused on transforming people’s standards of living. He said the province has recorded a lot of progress in infrastructure development, health care system, education and water provision among others with the major projects being implemented by local and rural authorities. “The major interventions revolve around disbursement of devolution funds. So far, we have received roughly $23 million which was disbursed through both urban and local authorities. To date, a lot of work has been done in terms of implementing identified projects. And I should say we are impressed with most of the proposed projects that the councils are working on as they are fulfilling the desires of the Government,” he said. Mr Maronge most local and rural authorities have been using the devolution funds to alleviate long term challenges. “If you go to Gweru, Zvishavane, Shurugwi and Redcliff, they have identified water related projects as they have been facing problems in that area. We are happy with the results so far realised. This is exactly what the Government had in mind when they came up with the devolution agenda,” he said. Mr Maronge said Gokwe Town Council and Mberengwa Rural District Council also purchased road construction equipment. “Mberengwa and Gokwe Town Council purchased road making equipment that will see the roads being rehabilitated. They also discovered that this was their area of concern,” he said. “Kwekwe, Zibagwe RDC and Gokwe RDC also focused on infrastructure development where clinics, classroom blocks and staff cottages were constructed.” “As for other local authorities, they also focused on infrastructure development like clinics, borehole drilling, classroom block construction and building of staff cottages at clinics and schools. This also means that there is proper accommodation and infrastructure across the province.” Mr Maronge said they will continue ensuring that local authorities work on their projects through monitoring their progress.