The Chronicle Walter Mswazie in Masvingo An outbreak of anthrax has killed 24 cattle in Bikita District in Masvingo and 28 people have reportedly been diagnosed with the disease. Masvingo Department of Veterinary Services Provincial officer Dr Ernest Dzimwasha confirmed the outbreak but said he could not give exact details. “I can confirm that there is an outbreak of anthrax in Bikita and a number of people have been affected. We also have reports of cattle dying but I am not in the office to give exact details,” said Dr Dzimwasha. However, Bikita District Development Coordinator Mr Bernard Hadzirambwi said most parts of Bikita East constituency were badly affected and discouraged people from eating beef from cattle dying from the  disease. “We are battling anthrax outbreak in Bikita district which had by Saturday killed 24 cattle in Ward 19 and 20 in Bikita East. I can say the greater part of eastern side of Nyika Growth Point is affected,” he said. Mr Hadzirambwi said Murwira clinic had recorded 21 cases of anthrax, Chirorwe three, Mukore two and Chikuku one. We have a total of 27 people diagnosed with the disease and more are expected as we hear that some are eating infected beef,” he said. Several cattle have died and 10 people were diagnosed with anthrax last week in Chibwanda area, Marondera West. Masvingo Provincial Medical Director (PMD) Dr Ammadeaus Shamhu could not be contacted for comment yesterday. A notice issued by the Ministry of Health and Child Care, however, confirmed the outbreak in Bikita. “The Ministry of Health and Child Care has confirmed an outbreak of human anthrax in the district of Bikita. Residents and visitors are encouraged to desist from consuming uninspected meat and to consult with their nearest health centres if they notice the following signs; small sore that develops into blisters and non-painful ulcers with a black centre. Nausea, loss of appetite, bloody diarrhoea, fever with stomach pains. Flue like symptoms, shortness of breath, coughing up blood and painful swallowing,” reads the notice. In 2005 three people and 130 cattle succumbed to an anthrax outbreak that hit most parts of Masvingo Province with Bikita District accounting for 14 cattle deaths.