The Chronicle Farirai Machivenyika, Harare Bureau The visit by China’s Minister of Foreign Affairs and State Councillor Mr Wang Yi, who is expected in Zimbabwe over the weekend as part of a five country African tour, will see the two countries discuss agreements in several fields. China is now Africa’s largest trading partner and a major investor on the continent. Speaking in an interview yesterday, Foreign Affairs and International Trade Minister Sibusiso Moyo said Mr Wang’s visit was testimony of the strong friendship between the two countries. “This is an important visit from an important guest from the People’s Republic of China,” he said. “This is a great friend who is coming and is in to pursue the issues which were agreed upon between President Mnangagwa and President Xi Jinping (during President Mnangagwa’s State Visit and on the sidelines of the Forum for China Africa Cooperation).” Some of the issues the two leaders agreed on were in the fields of trade and investment, education and skills development and China’s desire to import more citrus fruits from Zimbabwe. Some of the projects that are already being implemented include the expansion of Hwange 7 and 8 Thermal Power Station, expansion of Robert Gabriel Mugabe International Airport, NetOne expansion programme and the construction of the new Parliament Building, which is being done through a grant. Minister Moyo said the visit by Mr Wang symbolised the political relationship which exists between the two countries. “It also significantly depicts the strategic comprehensive partnership which has been established between the two countries and it further resonates with the kind of economic investments the People’s Republic of China has been doing in this country,” he said. Mr Wang’s visit is a continuation of a tradition that began in 1991 where the Asian country’s Foreign Affairs Minister visited African nations on the first overseas trip of the year. Mr Wang’s visit to Zimbabwe is part of a five country tour of the continent and the other countries are  Egypt, Djibouti, Eritrea and Burundi. Over the past two decades, China’s trade with Africa has grown 20-fold according to figures from China’s commerce ministry. Beijing is also the largest bilateral lender to most African countries. Over the past decade, it has financed about US$143 billion worth of infrastructure projects, including ports, railways, airports, motorways, roads and dams, according to data compiled by the China-Africa Research Initiative at the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies in Washington.