The Chronicle Michell Zvanyanya / Desmond Nleya, Chronicle Reporters PRICES of mealie-meal not covered by a Government subsidy have shot up at a time when the subsidised roller meal is in short supply. A 10kg bag of Ngwerewere super refined mealie-meal that was pegged at around $110 before the recent increase in fuel prices is selling for between $138 and $142. The re-introduction of subsidised mealie-meal by Government brought relief to most people who could not afford the prices of roller meal which was selling for $100 or more for a 10kg bag after the removal of the subsidy. A survey by The Chronicle yesterday in the city revealed that most major retail outlets in Bulawayo have increased the prices of mealie meal. At OK Zimbabwe the price was pegged at $138 for a Ngwerewere super refined 10kg bag. At Choppies the same commodity was going for $140 while at Greens Supermarket it was pegged at $142. In an interview yesterday, Confederation of Zimbabwe Retailers (CZR) President, Mr Benford Mutashu said the increase may be due to recent fuel price increases. Fuel prices went up by an average of 10 percent, the first adjustment since November last year. In a statement over the weekend, the Zimbabwe Energy Regulatory Authority said the maximum pump price per litre of diesel is now $19,55 from $17,90 while petrol has gone up to $18,28 from $17,44. Mr Mutashu said fuel is a major cost driver. “Super refined mealie-meal is not a controlled commodity hence it is very difficult to prescribe a price where millers incur costs. We are however not yet aware of the hikes in prices but speaking from a position where we understand the environment under which we are all trading, the increase in fuel prices might have contributed to these price increases as it is one of the major cost drivers,” he said. Mr Mutashu said if Government increases the supply of subsidised roller meal, the prices of other types of mealie meal will go down. On Tuesday, Bulawayo Provincial Affairs Minister Judith Ncube had to intervene and stop Galaxy Cash and Carry Supermarket located along Fort Street between 7th and 8th Avenue from forcing customers to buy groceries worth $150 in order to be allowed to buy roller meal. – @michellzvanyanyan2/ – @desmondndazi