The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter CASTLE Lager Premier Soccer League champions FC Platinum arrive in Bulawayo this morning for final preparations of their make-or-break Total Caf Champions League clash against Egyptian giants Al Ahly at Barbourfields Stadium on Saturday. The Zvishavane-based side remains the only winless Group B team after three rounds of matches while their opponents all sit on six points from the same number of matches. A loss on Saturday for Pure Platinum Play will automatically rule them out of the knockout stage they’d hoped to reach this season. In fact,  the new gaffer Pieter de Jongh needs a win on Saturday to reignite their chances of progressing to the quarter-finals. The club was yesterday believed to be making frantic efforts to register new acquisitions, defender Nomore Chinyerere from relegated Hwange, attacking midfielders Stanley Ngala from Manica Diamonds and Jimmy Gwara from ZPC Kariba. Former Triangle United skipper Ralph Kawondera is ineligible to take part in the Caf Champions League, having turned for the Sugar Boys in the Caf Confederation Cup. Last week, FC Platinum released six senior players, goalkeeper Wallace Magalane, midfielders Devon Chafa, Charles Sibanda, Rodwell Chinyengetere and strikers Albert Eonde and Mkhokheli Dube. The Zimbabwe champions were left with just two goalkeepers Petros Mhari and Francis Tizayi and will be praying that none of the two sustains a serious injury. A win on Saturday will give Pure Platinum Play a psychological boost going into their next home match against Sudanese side Al Hilal the following Saturday. They wrap up their mini-league round of matches with an away tie against Étoile du Sahel of Tunisia at the end of this month. Meanwhile, Al Ahly left Cairo on Monday night and are scheduled to arrive in Harare later today before heading to Bulawayo tomorrow. Caf Champions league Group B table P W D L F A GD Pts Etoile du Sahel 3 2 0 1 4 1 3 6 Al Ahly 3 2 0 1 4 2 2 6 Al Hilal 3 2 0 1 4 3 1 6 FC Platinum 3 0 0 3 1 7 -6 0