The Chronicle Fairness Moyana/ Leonard Ncube, Chronicle Reporters THE Hwange District Civil Protection Committee has asked Government to supply local clinics with additional medicines in the wake of flash floods that hit Hwange over the weekend. The committee is also appealing for donations to assist 70 families affected by floods some of whom are living in temporary shelter. Heavy downpours of up to 139mm pounded Hwange town on Saturday in just three hours resulting in flash floods which damaged homes and property including a stockpile of coal at Hwange Power Station. At least 70 people were affected by the floods with 35 in dire situation having been evacuated to temporary shelters at the Hwange Colliery Company guest house. Although no injuries or deaths were recorded during the floods, most victims were left vulnerable after losing food stuffs and clothes. CPC chairperson Mrs Nyaradzo Masoja urged well wishers to assist with various items that include food, clothes, stationery and medicines. She said they have since requested for an additional supply of medicines from the Ministry of Health and Child Care to combat diseases. “We have also requested the Ministry of Health to supply clinics with additional medicines and aqua tabs to curb water borne diseases. “Also of great importance is that there are some people with chronic illnesses who lost their medicines during the floods so we are in the process of identifying them so we can assist. We also appeal for diapers for babies who were also affected,” said Mrs Masoja. “We are appealing for donations to assist the families that were affected by floods. So far we have on record 55 families that were displaced by the floods and because we are still tallying the number is likely to reach 75. “Most of these families’ social amenities such as food, sanitary wear, clothes and other items were destroyed when their homes were submerged in water so there is a need to attend to that. “We are calling on companies, churches, individuals and stakeholders as a whole to assist in this humanitarian need that is before us.” Some of the required items include mealie-meal, sugar, beans, cooking oil, salt, chunks, washing and bathing soaps, sanitary wear as well as bedding and linen among other things. HAZ Victoria Falls chapter chairman Mr Farai Chimba said they mobilised foodstuffs and water for the victims. Hwange Local Board Councillor Fani Chirwa, in whose ward the majority of victims resided, said the immediate need for the victims is food, clothes and books for children as all these were destroyed. She said while water had drained away, it’s not yet safe for people to go back to their houses as more rains may be on the way. Hwange Colliery spokesperson Ms Rugare Dhobbie paid tribute to well-wishers for helping the victims.