The Chronicle EDITOR: My name is Etiwel Mutero, the son of Elijah Hunjani and Edinah Shavi. I have an relative, my mother’s brother, Freddy Nyamanga Shavi whom we affectionately call Uncle FN.  He used to care for my family, sending groceries to us in Gokwe from his Gweru Southdowns house in the 80s.  We knew him as a generous uncle together with his wife Mai Nyaradzo who was a nurse at Gweru General Hospital. However, Uncle FN told me in 1990 that he had divorced his wife.  Then in the 2000s Uncle FN married a beautiful single mother MaNcube who was very nice to us just like Uncle FN’s first wife.  I liked her very much but she was always complaining about Uncle FN having many girlfriends.  When I visited the couple one day I found a certain door damaged and I asked MaNcube whom I always called by her first name Netsai what happened to the door and she said it was broken while they were fighting with Uncle FN who did not want me to know that they were always fighting. We used to be friends with Uncle FN.  At one time he was my boss at Ministry of Education Arts, Sports and Culture Kwekwe District offices where he once worked as a District Education Officer (DEO).  He worked as a teacher, deputy head, headmaster, DEO and worked at both provincial and national level in the building portfolio. He was a great speaker and I used to invite him as a facilitator at my records and libraries workshops. In 2016 I received a call that Netsai had been found unconscious in her bedroom in a pool of blood and Uncle FN was nowhere to be seen.  I rushed to Gweru and visited Netsai at Gweru General Hospital where she was having difficulty in breathing.  She later died and Uncle FN was convicted of murder and sentenced to 20 years in jail. I continued visiting him first at Whawha Prison and now at Khami.  He was hypertensive and later suffered a stroke while in jail and is now in a vegetative state for more than a year now.  He can’t talk or walk.  He needs medical supplies which sometimes cost US$100 a month and sometimes the money isn’t there.  He needs food supplies and sometimes I can’t afford to buy it because I have no one to assist me. Uncle FN has a house in Southdowns, Gweru.  There is a tenant there but the rentals are being collected by a certain woman who is spending all the money and sparing nothing for the owner’s upkeep. I know my uncle has friends in the Ministry of Education, Southdowns community and the Baptist Church.  May you guys remember your friend.  He needs your help.  He needs your prayers.  Just visit him.  He is currently admitted to Mpilo Central Hospital under guard.  If you want to visit him first go to Khami Maximum Prison, get permission to visit him and come back to Mpilo. May the Lord bless those who will read and act. My contact details are +264817871070 and etiwelm02@gmail.com