The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma and Rutendo Ngara, Chronicle Reporters SOME State universities that had increased tuition fees by more than 1 000 percent without Government approval have reverted to last semester fees as Government completes consultations on the issue. Social media has been awash with statements of alleged fees increases by tertiary institutions, some as high as $51 000 per semester. Only the Great Zimbabwe University (GZU) formally communicated the increased fee structure to students. GZU had increased fees for block release classes from $1 300 to between $9 600 and $15 000 depending on the degree level. The Minister of Higher and Tertiary Education, Innovation Science and Technology Development, Professor Amon Murwira yesterday said the Government was completing consultations and would make a formal announcement to students soon. Speaking during a meeting with block release and cohort classes yesterday in Masvingo, GZU Vice Chancellor Professor Rungano Zvobgo said the university had reverted to the old fees. “The fees will be determined by the Minister next week. As of now fees will be the same as last semester,” said Prof Zvobgo. He advised students not to register until a decision on fees has been made by the Government but urged them to attend lectures. “Students can pay the same fees but we are waiting for the Minister to give a formal statement about the fees structures. For registration you can not register now, you will register during the second block because we do not know when the minister will issue a formal statement on the fees structure,” said Prof Zvobgo. A level 4:2 student who preferred anonymity said the meeting also tackled problems being faced by the students with the highlight of the meeting being the high fees increase.  “We met the Vice Chancellor yesterday and the main issue was to do with fees. I feel relieved somehow because $9 600 was too much for me. We know that the Government will not approve these exorbitant fees,” she said. The National University of Science and Technology’s (Nust) marketing and communication officer Mrs Lindiwe Nyoni said fees discussions are underway. “Discussions are in progress and at the moment we are not sure if the fees will be increased or not.  After all has been done we will inform our students,” said Mrs Nyoni. Sources at Gwanda State University (GSU), Lupane State University (LSU) and at the University of Zimbabwe said the fees had not changed yet and classes are expected to resume in time. Efforts to get a comment from Midlands State University (MSU) Information and Public Relations acting Director Mr Reginald Nyango were fruitless as he did not respond to emailed questions. Prof Murwira said Government is carrying out consultations with the responsible authorities to finalise the 2020 university fees proposals. “We will make a formal announcement after completing the consultations process.” On Tuesday, Prof Murwira said $15 000 was unbearable for most students. “Even after the review, the fees are not likely to exceed $5 000. Government will not approve exorbitant hikes,” he said. — @mthabisi_mthire/@missngara. 