The Chronicle Cletus Mushanawani, Harare Bureau GOVERNMENT will continue building the capacity of satellite schools to ensure that all learners get a conducive learning environment to avoid zero percent pass rates. In an interview, Primary and Secondary Education Deputy Minister, Edgar Moyo, said most satellite schools lack basic necessities, a reason why zero percent pass rates are still being recorded. “This year, we will be intensifying monitoring and evaluation of the learning processes in all our schools. We want to address the worrying trend of zero percent pass rates especially in satellite schools. “Remember, we have the Performance Lag Address Programme that was introduced to help all struggling schools to catch up with their peers and will be intensified this year. “We have discovered that the major contributing factor to zero percent pass rates is lack of basic infrastructure and other necessities in most satellite schools. These schools will be among the first beneficiaries of any support Government will be rendering to schools,” said Deputy Minister Moyo. A number of primary schools recorded zero percent pass rates during last November’s Zimbabwe Schools Examination Council examinations across the country. An assessment of the aggregated figures from the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education on the performance of last year’s Grade Seven learners showed that only Harare and Bulawayo provinces did not record zero percent pass rates, followed by Manicaland Province which only had two schools. Matabeleland South had three schools with zero percent pass rates, while Matabeleland North had the highest number of schools at 20. Masvingo has 16 schools. Makonde District in Mashonaland West had the highest number of poor performing schools across the country as it had 11 schools that recorded zero percent. It was also the only district in Mashonaland West Province that recorded zero percent. An analysis of last November results from Grade Seven to A-Level showed that besides satellite schools posting poor results, schools where there is a lot of illegal gold mining activities also had a poor showing.