The Chronicle How can ICT skills help you get a job? Having even a basic understanding of ICT — Information and Communications Technology — can open a lot more opportunities in the workplace, whether you’re working in a shop, an office or elsewhere in industry. Most employers today expect their staff to be able to use a computer and, used well, technology is a tool that can empower you and help you succeed. Along with English and Maths, ICT qualifications are arguably the most important to be able to offer an employer. While an employer may not expect you to have prior experience of the specific hardware and software used in their business, having even basic ICT skills can help you win a job offer over another candidate who is not computer literate. Definition of ICT ICT stands for Information Communication Technology and refers to the set of technologies that allow the processing and exchange of information in digital format. CT skills concern technologies for integrated telecommunication systems (wired and wireless communication lines), computers, audio-video technologies and related software, which allow users to create, store and exchange information Where are ICT systems commonly used? Many sectors rely on ICT systems, which is why having ITC skills on your CV can help you find a job. To take a couple of examples: Retail environment: a shop will use an ICT system to monitor the amount of stock that is brought in and what gets sold. This makes it less likely that the shop will run out of an item as it can be reordered when stocks are shown to be low.  Food sector: a warehouse will use an ICT system to check on stock levels and movement; a factory will use it to regulate machinery; a haulier will use it to check on the status of deliveries. ICT a critical tool for entrepreneurship Besides, ICT might offer learning opportunities, business planning solutions, database tools as well as business training opportunities with the help of business plan simulators. ICT can help to develop and enhance communication and social networks as well. The increase in mobile phone access and the introduction of smart phones have also increased access to the internet on the go. Mobile phones have replaced the old table-top telephones causing disruption in the Telecommunication sector. The presence of mobile phones and the internet has created totally new sectors, given rise to new companies and provided jobs for many while also impacting entrepreneurship and business models. Some of the notable contribution of ICT in entrepreneurship includes; Access to Markets: E-commerce as this is commonly referred to has greatly minimised the need for physical infrastructure for trade to take place. Platforms like Jumia give entrepreneurs access to markets in all parts of the country and all over the world. Virtual and efficient business coordination: Technology has completely revolutionised the way businesses operate today especially businesses operating in a niche market. These businesses use of apps and often do not require the physical presence of the business owner and can often be efficiently run virtually such as Uber. Advertising and Marketing Communication: With the emergence can be reached with advertising messages via a tweet on twitter, a post on Facebook or videos on YouTube etc at way cheaper rates. Increasing revenue streams and Saving Time/Money: Technology has provided new and exciting opportunities to increase revenue. Such opportunities include the provision of movies and games for relaxation at a fee. For example, Netflix Teleconferencing: Important meetings can also be held via video conferencing technology systems which allow 2 or more locations to communicate via simultaneous 2-way audio and video transmissions, eliminating the logistics of travelling, saving time and money. It is also common practice to reach out to audiences by streaming seminars, conferences and programs live on the internet. ICT Skills: Business Growth Tool! Information and communication technologies are essential in the modern world. It is very important to utilise and manage the increasing volume of information effectively and securely. This is the reason why ICT skills are essential and should form a major part of an organisations strategy in providing better quality data management and information utilisation. These skills can help organisations redefine their relationships with customers, suppliers and other organisations. ICT skills are essential and should form a major part of an organisations strategy in providing better quality data management and information utilisation. ICT training and /or studies offered at Trust Academy have numerous advantages to individuals and organisations. At individual level the training can help develop appropriate entrepreneurial skills much as they can help increase your employability and mobility in different sectors of the economy. The skills acquired can help you establish or run your own business professionally and profitably. ICDL — International Computer Driving Licence In current business and social environment, you really feel awkward if not ashamed when you fail to use a simple software on your own nice cell phone. Just imagine paying someone to have him/her install WhatsApp. You are invited for an interview the prospective employer wants you to have basic ICT skills and you don’t have!  You travel outside the country where telephone rates are exorbitant. You want to communicate back home and are unable to use the internet which is fast, effective and economical means of communication. These are some of the vast solutions in everyday life solved by understanding basic ICT. ICDL is for everyone regardless of profession, secretary, clerk, till operator, computer tutor, typist, student etc. Learners gain effective use of computers, skills in report writing, dissertation, preparation, budgeting and statistics data base use. Effective presentation skills, using emails, the list is endless. Also ideal for the Primary school learners. Certificate in PC engineering, System Administration & Networking Computer maintenance and ICT gadgets repairs is a thriving business in the City of Bulawayo. Stand out as the best computer repair go-to-guy through our certificate in PC engineering, system administration and Networking. With this course you will gain key skills in fixing and repairing computers, PC and laptop maintenance, software installations and support, hardware support, network configuration, network maintenance and support among others. Certificate in Software Engineering This course equips learners with software development skills. Developing of applications for both mobile and computer use for small business, NGOs to large conglomerates Certificate in Graphic Design There are vast skills and competencies one gains from taking this four-month course. As a graphic designer you will be able to design, billboards, flyers, business cards, magazines to newspapers and online adverts for Facebook and websites. ArchiCAD, AutoCAD 2D and 3D By the end of this course learners would be competent in creating architectural drawings using the computer. Drawing engineering plans and design sing a computer for mining engineering. Other medium- term courses offered at Trust Academy ICT school include: Oracle, Linux Administration, pastel accounting. The Information Communication Technology industry is an incredibly fun, vibrant and dynamic sector with enormous growth potential that is an ideal place for young people. This industry also has various employment opportunities and does not mean one has to sit in front of a computer the whole day in a dingy office. This article is prepared and presented in the interest of providing free career guidance and counselling to all people who value education and training as a critical cornerstone to success in life. Trust Academy invites all people, with or without O levels as well as degree holders who have a dilemma or are unsure of what career path to pursue to visit their offices on 3rd Floor, Haddon and Sly building, corner Fife street and 8th avenue for FREE career guidance. Alternatively, write to: infobyo@trustacademy.co.zw or WhatsApp 0712 212 179