The Chronicle Freedom Mupanedemo, Midlands Bureau Gweru residents and the business community have castigated the city’s new budget which came into effect this week saying new tariffs hikes were a clear indication that the opposition MDC led council is not concerned with the welfare of people. The local authority started effecting its $2 billion 2020 budget this week with business people intending to renew shop licences now having to fork out $5 000, up from $300. According to council sources, there has not been any residential and commercial stands plan approvals this week after the fees to approve a residential stand plan jumped from last year’s $1 500 to about $18 000 this week. According to council’s 2020 budget, the local authority will charge a penalty of about $36 000 for constructing a house without inspection in high density suburbs and $59 000 for the same offence in the  low density suburbs. According to the tariff schedule, those who intend to bury their loved ones using Gweru city cemeteries will have to fork out $3 290 during the week and $2 193 at weekends. Kombi operators intending to use Gweru city council parking bays will now have to pay $2 365 parking fees for an 18-seater bus for a term of four months up from last year’s $100 per term. Buses and minibuses using the terminus now have to part with $3 547 up from last year’s $150 while vendors and hawkers were also not spared as they are now supposed to pay $1 182 for a vending licence up from last year’s $50 per term. Residents and the business community yesterday said the new tariffs were exorbitant. “These tariffs are a clear indication that our city fathers do not have people at heart. Imagine an ordinary family with a four roomed house in Mkoba is now supposed to fork out no less that $400 as fixed rates  per month. It’s obviously beyond the reach of many,” said Mr Cornelius Selipiwe, Gweru Residents Association Secretary General. He said there will be many defaulters as most residents cannot afford the new tariffs. A local businessman Mr Richard Chirume said he will not be able to renew his shop licence. “The tariffs are just ridiculous and I won’t be able to renew my licence. We have since met as the business community in Gweru and we will present our paper to council,” he said. Gweru Mayor, Councillor Josiah Makombe said the local authority adjusted its budget in line with the prevailing economic situation. He said the local authority will consider the complaints from residents as it remains sensitive to their plight. “We are a listening local authority and we have received several complaints on the new budget that came into effect this week. We will obviously look into them but our budget was crafted with the poor in mind,” he said.