The Chronicle China has confirmed cases of human-to-human transmission in the outbreak of a new SARS-like virus as the number of cases soared and the World Health Organisation (WHO) said it would consider declaring an international public health emergency. The coronavirus, which has spread to three other Asian countries and infected more than 200 people in China, has caused alarm because it of its genetic similarities to Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), which killed nearly 650 people across mainland China and Hong Kong in 2002-2003. The discovery of human-to-human transmission comes as hundreds of millions of people are criss-crossing the country in packed trains, buses and planes this week to celebrate the Lunar New Year with relatives. Health authorities in the central city of Wuhan, where a seafood market has been identified as the centre of the outbreak, yesterday said that an 89-year-old man became the fourth person to die from the virus and that 15 medical staff had been infected. A second case was also confirmed in Shanghai yesterday while five people have been diagnosed with the virus in Beijing. Zhong Nanshan, a renowned scientist at the national health commission, confirmed that the virus was being transmitted between humans, state media reported late Monday. The WHO had previously identified animals as the likely primary source, but had warned of “some limited human-to-human transmission”. Zhong told CCTV that patients can contract the virus without having visited Wuhan. He also said 14 medical staff had been infected but it was not clear if he was referring to the Wuhan cases. In southern Guangdong province, two patients were infected by family members who visited Wuhan, he told CCTV. The WHO said a key emergency committee would meet Wednesday to determine whether to declare an international public health emergency. The agency has only used the rare label a handful of times, including during the H1N1 – or swine flu – pandemic of 2009 and the Ebola epidemic that devastated parts of West Africa from 2014 to 2016. The Chinese government announced yesterday it was classifying the outbreak in the same category as the SARS outbreak, meaning compulsory isolation for those diagnosed with the disease and the potential to implement quarantine measures on travel. China’s President Xi Jinping said that the virus must be “resolutely contained” and stressed that information must be released “in a timely manner”, in his first public comments on the outbreak on Monday. The Communist government was accused of covering up the SARS outbreak in 2003 but some foreign experts praised the swift release of information on the new virus.-AFP.