The Chronicle Michell Zvanyanya, Chronicle Reporter POLICE in Bulawayo have recovered household property valued at R16 000 allegedly stolen by a 36-year-old man on Christmas Day from a house in Cowdray Park suburb. Bulawayo acting police spokesperson Assistant Inspector Nomalanga Msebele confirmed the recovery. She said Lizwe Sibanda of the same suburb has since been arrested following a tip off from members of the public. “I can confirm the recovery of property valued at R16 000 stolen through a case of unlawful entry from the complainant’s house in Cowdray Park suburb in Bulawayo on December 25 last year. While the accused person has been arrested investigations are still underway under ZRP Luveve,” she said. Asst Inspector Msebele said a black Compaq laptop, a Lenovo laptop, an Open View decoder, a 42-inch plasma TV, a Volt cellphone, a silver Hisense cellphone, an empty 25 litre bucket and a cream baby blanket were some of the goods recovered. She said during the day on December 25 Sibanda allegedly broke into the house using an unknown object in the owner’s absence. Asst Insp Msebele said the accused person gained access to the complainant’s sitting room and stole the property before running away unnoticed. “On December 31 last year at around 1PM Crime Prevention Unit (CPU) members led by Sgt Gumede received a tip off to the effect that the accused person was selling a plasma television. Acting on the tip off, CPU operatives proceeded to the accused person’s place of residence where they conducted a raid and managed to arrest him. They managed to recover a black Compaq laptop, a Boost cellphone, an empty 25 litre bucket and a cream baby blanket,” she said. Asst Insp Msebele said after the arrest police carried out further investigations that led to the recovery of the rest of the property from the accused person’s friends Sinfree Moyo (54) of Njube suburb and John Shava (32) of Pumula South suburb who is also a second-hand goods dealer in the city. “The accused person led the police to house in Njube suburb where a black Open View decoder, a 42-inch Hisense Plasma TV, A Volt cellphone and a Hisense cellphone were recovered from the accused person’s friend Moyo,” she said. “Sibanda also led them to Bulawayo CBD at corner Fort Street and 6th Avenue shop where a Lenovo laptop and its charger were recovered from Shava of Pumula South suburb in Bulawayo.” Asst Inspector Msebele urged members of the public to safeguard their houses and report suspicious behaviour occurring in their communities to the police. She said members of the public must desist from buying second hand property without verifying with the police. — @michellzvanyanyan2