The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter FIVE-STAR Matetsi River Lodge in Victoria Falls has been listed by an American magazine, Afar, as one of the top 10 leading executive African safaris to spend holidays at. Afar is a publication launched in 2009 in California, United States and is focused on experimental travel. Situated on the Zambezi River bank about 40 kilometres upstream from the Victoria Falls, Matetsi River Lodge boasts of large villas for huge family outings and private secluded suites for those wanting privacy. Posting on its website, Afar.Com listed Matetsi River Lodge in 10th position with 95,95 points. Topping the list is Singita Sabi Sand, Sabi Sands Game Reserve in South Africa which has 98,59 points. Tanzania dominates the top 10 with four entries namely Gibb’s Farm in Karatu, Singita Grumeti, Four Seasons Safari Lodge (both in Serengeti National Park) and The Highlands in Ngorongoro Conservation Area, Serengeti National Park. South Africa also has Londolozi and Lion Sands Game Reserve both in Sabi Sands Game Reserve while Zambia (Mfuwe Lodge located in South Luangwa National Park), Kenya (Beyond Bateleur Camp in the Masai Mara National Reserve) and Zimbabwe have one entry each. Every year the magazine asks readers to comment on their travel experiences around the globe while sharing opinions on top hotels, resorts, cities and so on. The ratings are therefore based on facilities, location, service, food and overall value. The publication classifies African safari as a “getaway that stays with you long after you’ve returned home.” Zimbabwe Tourism Authority spokesperson Mr Godfrey Koti said the listing is another feather on destination Zimbabwe’s cap. “We are excited and certainly happy for Matetsi. Afar is a very well-respected publication internationally and this is something that is encouraging for the destination considering the fact that we are coming from a very bad spate of negative publicity about our Victoria Falls being reported as dry which unfortunately was very untrue. “As far as this endorsement is concerned, it is an attest to the fact that Zimbabwe is still a first-choice destination and that it is among the best in the entire world,” he said. The listing of Matetsi adds to numerous other endorsements the destination has received from the international world. Bloomberg has listed destination Zimbabwe among the top 24 destinations in the world while New York-based monthly women’s magazine, Harper’s Bazaar also listed it among the top 10 places to spend honeymoon in the world. International holiday rental search engine, HomeToGo, also named the country among the top 10 trending destinations for United Kingdom-based tourists, putting it on number six last year. HomeToGo believes that Zimbabwe, as a nation, has a lot to offer, which includes good hospitability, beautiful landscapes, wildlife and great eco-tourism opportunities. The country also won an award for the most sustainable tourist destination at the International Tourism Bourse in Germany and was also voted as the third must-visit destination after Sri Lanka and Germany. Lonely Planet, Frommers and National Geographic also acknowledged the country as one of the prime tourist destinations in the world. A United States magazine, Travel + Leisure, named Victoria Falls Safari Lodge as the 5th top resort hotel in Africa. Victoria Falls Safari Lodge is one of the many tourism facilities under the grand banner of leading hospitality group, Africa Albida Tourism (AAT). A number of high-profile celebrities visited the country last year and ZTA says this is an endorsement of the country as a destination of choice. — @ncubeleon.