The Chronicle Michell Zvanyanya, Chronicle Reporter A worldwide spiritual movement, Brahma Kumaris, officially opened a spiritual university at its centre in Bulawayo yesterday to provide stress-relieving programmes. Brahma Kumaris is a worldwide spiritual movement dedicated to personal transformation and world renewal that was founded in India in 1937 and has spread to over 130 countries in all continents. Some of the programmes offered at the Brahma Kumaris Spiritual University include character building, living values, right to God, heal the world, and the newly implemented meditation course that touches on issues affecting humanity. Addressing delegates during the official opening of the institution in Suburbs, Industry and Commerce Deputy Minister, Raj Modi commended the Kumaris for provision of programmes to promote peace that guarantees happiness in peoples’ lives. “I have great joy to be here on this special occasion of Brahma Kumaris in Bulawayo. The services they offer are very much needed by all of us as we go through a lot of stress and tension in our lives. We all need peace in our lives. Today I would like to give my good wishes for the opening of this centre on this auspicious day,” he said. “My congratulations to the Brahma Kumaris and may everyone benefit from the free activities offered at the institution which will help make our lives, families and country more peaceful and happier. The Brahma Kumaris is not connected to any denomination and is open to all and so I request all to take benefit from their services.” Mrs Sifiso Takavarasha, from the Ministry of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation, said youths in the city are set to benefit from the institution which emphasises on character development. She assured delegates that the Ministry will continue working with the Brahma Kumaris and connect them with other vocational training institutions in the country to promote youth participation in programmes offered. “We are here today to support and appreciate efforts made by the Brahma Kumaris in the establishment of this spiritual university in the city of Bulawayo which will actually provide values to our youths based on teachings that will be offered at this institution. Through programmes like drug awareness, character building just to mention a few where youths are taught the art of thinking positively and effectively, we are indeed assured of a great nation as the youths are the future,” said Mrs Takavarasha. – @michellzvanyanyan2