The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo I can’t begin to describe how tired I am as I’m writing this. In-between mothering, wife-ing, working and adulting in general — life is no stroll in the park! Our country’s unfriendly economic environment doesn’t make it any easier. You literally have to bend your back for everything. To be honest, it’s hard for most to have time for themselves or even money for new threads. On New Year’s Eve, my husband and I had a conversation about what we wanted to achieve in 2020. One of my resolutions was to lose some weight. Yes, I want to lose a few kilos. I probably shouldn’t have said it loudly because now everyone is going to be side-eyeing me for progress. Anyway, whether I lose the weight or not, time will tell, but I hope I can be consistent enough to do it. It has become increasingly important to me because becoming a new mum in this harsh economy has been an uphill task. It came as an epiphany to me that no matter how tough things may be, one thing I still have control over is how I look and how I feel about myself. Difficult as it may be, we all HAVE to rise above our circumstances and make the best of what we have. It costs nothing to motivate yourself to get out of bed and live. I think once you stop living, you stop caring about all the other aspects of your life. And you and me wouldn’t like the result of that. It can easily deteriorate into depression and you know how shabbily it gets when you’re in a bad state of mind? Someone once told me that you can tell a lot about someone’s state of mind from the way they dress, how tidy/untidy their bedroom or personal space is, the state of their car or handbag. Everyday, make a conscious decision to fight for your sanity. Fight for your happiness and consequently your personal brand. A grown woman who loves herself will always make sure she’s cleaned up and well put together even if she’s got nowhere to go. Your spouse can’t even tell you that you stink and need to take a shower because they love you too much and don’t want to hurt your feelings. Save them the hassle and do the right thing. Even when you’ve showered, being at home doesn’t give you the ticket to dress anyhow. Of course you won’t wear your Steve Madden heels and Levi’s jeans but do pick a decent set of clothes — nothing with holes or unsightly for anyone who might visit you. I know you’ll be at home and want to feel comfortable but comfort doesn’t mean you wear trash. Invest in pretty “home” clothes like cotton T-shirts, shorts and airy dresses that will let you live. They’ll be comfortable and roomy but also give you that fresh “chillas” look when you get unexpected visitors. Nothing is as embarrassing as needing to shower or get a change of clothes while your visitors sit in the lounge waiting for you. Imagine that untamed hair being what someone experiences when they come to visit you. Surely, slay queens also keep it on a style low when they’re at home. Be approrpriate for whatever spaces you visit. Weddings, church, work — dress appropriately. There’s no need to make it obvious that you’re struggling with stuff from the way you dress and look. You can’t even walk tall but drag yourself like a bag of potatoes. Decide now, as the year begins, to do better as a person. Dress better. Bath a minute longer. Brush your teeth a tad longer and smell better. You just never know who you might meet and how they’ll change your destiny for the better. Until next week, flaunt your pattern and style and don’t forget to catch up with me on Twitter handle @Yolisswa or WhatsApp +263774492700.