The Chronicle Wedding of . . . Evelyn Marange, fifth born of Mrs Alice Marange and the late Mr Elson Marange of Mutare and Ofias Sibanda, the fourth born of the late Mr and Mrs Sibanda of Zvishavane. We chose . . . Graceland Gardens in Burnside, Bulawayo for our wedding reception and ceremony as the garden provided us an amazing experience as we walked down the aisle, accompanied by the sights and sounds of nature. The venue provided a relaxing and stunningly beautiful atmosphere for guests to enjoy. It also offered plenty of space for kids to play around without disturbing anyone and also provided a picture-perfect photo backdrop for one of the most important days of our lives. Even the out of town guests where accommodated there and there was minimal decoration since the venue was well appointed. How didyou meet . . . It was in Bulawayo in October 2018. I remember that I was doing some shopping at Edgars and he approached me. We started talking and after some minutes, he asked for my number. From then on, we hit it off instantly and a month later, we fell in love. How did he propose? . . . We set a dinner date in March, 2019. On the day, everything went perfectly as expected. I said to him “this is beautiful” and he replied “wait until you see this” and he got up and went down on one knee. I was crying already with shock and a lot of mixed feelings and he asked me to marry him. I laughed and said yes then he wiped off my tears and we kissed. Afterwards, we then told our relatives about us settling down and they all supported us. We then started preparing for the wedding. Did you face any challenges preparing for the wedding? . . . The budget we had was small considering the number of people who had to attend the wedding. Also, it was somehow difficult to choose service providers as some lacked standards. But with support from relatives and friends who helped financially, our wedding was a success. Wedding dress . . . Ball gown. Wedding colours . . . Dusty pink and nude. Bridal team . . . Was a 30-member one with Mr Kahwema as best man and best girl being Jose Chindara. Cake . . . Was a five-tier fruit cake. Favourite part of the wedding . . . Signing the marriage certificate. Most touching speech . . . Was when the magistrate said the ink of the pen which we used to sign our marriage certificates will last for 99 years so is my marriage with my husband. When he also said that his job was to send people to prison but this prison he was sending us to was a different kind which is full of love, loyalty, submission and caring for each other until death do us apart Photographer . . . Digital Shop. MC . . . Mr Chad Ndebele. Entertainment . . . Future Sound and Bridal team. Guests . . . 300 people. Budget . . . US$12 000. Honeymoon  . . . We went to Elephant Hills Resort in Victoria Falls. – If you want your wedding to be featured on our Wedding of the Week column, please feel free to get in touch with the Showbiz Desk on 09-888871-9, 0774 007 233 or send an email to maffarro@gmail.com.