The Chronicle Andile Tshuma The past few weeks have seen a lot of dishes shared on social media with the hashtag #JanuaryMeals and many others. Other people were posting plates with different recipes of potato dishes with greens on the side. It was all light spirited, mostly inspired by a recent speech by the President encouraging people to eat more greens and potatoes as doctors advise against too much meat consumption, which is not healthy. While some made mockery and jokes out of the statement, it is a fact that a plant-based diet is healthier, that is why even people who fall sick from certain ailments will be told to either quit completely or limit beef and all of red meat consumption, and in more extreme cases to stop eating all kinds of meat. There are so many debates about which diet is best for the human body. Some people swear by Banting, whereby they only eat protein and vegetables and do away with starch. Eating meat is a matter of choice. But it is a fact that some diets are better than others for the body. Some people are vegan and eat strictly plant-based foods. Some people eat everything, in moderate amounts while other people have had to forego the food they love due to health conditions. Changing young minds is important in promoting healthy diets as food habits and preferences are established quite early in life. Having children who appreciate the importance of healthy eating means that the next generation will know the value of good healthy wholesome food. One of the best diets for the human body is a plant-based diet, where at least half of the foods consumed is unrefined plant food. While health and wellness communities will continue to argue on the best diets and wellness entrepreneurs will try to force some special protein shakes down your throat, it is generally agreed that diets emphasising on fresh ingredients and minimising on processed foods are superior for overall wellness. A plant-based diet is a way of eating that celebrates plant foods and cuts out unhealthy items such as added sugars, and refined grains. Plant-based diets have been linked to a number of health benefits including reducing your risk of heart disease, certain cancers, obesity, diabetes, and cognitive decline. Research suggests that following a plant-based diet may reduce risk of certain types of cancer, and are an effective tool in managing and reducing the risk of developing diabetes. This diet is also known to help reduce chances of developing heart disease, obesity and a lot of other non-communicable disease. Switching to a plant-based diet is not only good for health, but is also beneficial to the environment and our planet as people who follow such a diet often tend to have smaller and fewer carbon footprint. Plant diets are environmentally friendly as compared to diets that rely heavily on mass produced animal products and produce. Reducing the number of animal products in your diet and purchasing local, sustainable produce helps in driving the local economy and reduces reliance on factory farming which is an unsustainable method of food production. Globally, a number of countries are battling a crisis of extremes, with many affected by obesity while some by food insecurity. Promoting plant-based diets, and the dignity of having people grow their own food in their backyards, will help in ensuring there is enough to go round and that people eat food while it is in its most natural and healthiest state. Eating a healthier diet by eating more seasonal fruits and vegetables and reducing the consumption of junk food could help in ensuring that more people adopt healthier eating habits. For instance, it is the rainy season, and although the rains are poor, there is a wide range of edible plants and fruits. Ulude, idelele, imbuya, amakhomane are available at this time of the year. Even the weed black jack that sticks to clothes is good to eat and grows throughout the year. Mangoes and peaches are in season and almost every household has at least one fruit tree in my neighbourhood. It is good to make the most of these fruits while they are in season, or to preserve them by freezing, pickling or drying. Over 30 000 edible plant species are known to humanity, of which only 200 are cultivated at farm level. The eight major ones are wheat, maize, rice, barley, beans, groundnuts, potatoes and sorghum. Governments and organisations must work harder to ensure that people grow wider food varieties, the vulnerable are protected and that there is enough to go round. The healthy eating message should be part of the policies of health ministries so that more people understand the impact of unhealthy eating habits, coming from experts. – @andile_tshuma