The Chronicle Cape Town — Manchester City boss Pep Guardiola has urged the club’s supporters to fill the Etihad Stadium when Manchester United pay them a visit. The City boss wants to see a full house as holders City host rivals Manchester United in the second leg of the Carabao Cup semi-final tomorrow, hoping to complete the job after winning 3-1 at Old Trafford. Guardiola made his plea after a crowd of 39,223, some way short of the 55,000 capacity, watched Sunday’s routine 4-0 win over 10-man Fulham in the FA Cup fourth round. He said: “Now we have three days to prepare (to play) against United. Hopefully, our fans can come and make our stadium full. “The determination was always there in the Premier League. We are still there fighting every single day, especially at Sheffield United (last week). “Now the determination is the next one, the Carabao Cup second leg to get to the final. That is the target.” City were not tested by Championship Fulham, whose hopes effectively ended when captain Tim Ream was sent off for denying Gabriel Jesus a goalscoring opportunity after six minutes. Ilkay Gundogan scored from the resulting penalty and Bernardo Silva added a second. Jesus wrapped up victory with two more in quick succession after the break. Guardiola said: “After one or two minutes I thought it would be a tough tough game. I knew after watching them against Charlton and Leeds it was a team with a lot of courage, that’s why they are where they are in their position in the Championship. “But after the red card, it was a little bit different.” City’s four goals took their tally for the season in all competitions to 102. Guardiola said: “We always score goals, especially the last three seasons. We always had the ability to score but the problem is that we concede few (chances) but that ends in a goal too often this season. “But in general, the team always scores goals.” Meanwhile, Liverpool manager Jurgen Klopp confirmed he will not take charge of the Reds’ FA Cup replay against Shrewsbury, nor will any senior players from the European champions take part. Klopp made 11 changes as the League One side, 59 places below Liverpool in the English football pyramid, came from 2-0 down to secure a replay at Anfield on Sunday. However, the German did still include a handful of experienced players such as Adrian, Joel Matip, Dejan Lovren, Fabinho and Divock Origi. Even they are set to miss the replay as it falls a few days into Liverpool’s two-week winter break from Premier League action. Klopp said he has already promised that week off to first-team players and that under-23s coach Neil Critchley will take charge of team. “In April 2019, we got a letter from the Premier League where they asked us to respect the winter break, not to organise international friendlies and not to organise competitive games in respect of it,” said Klopp. “I have said to the boys already, two weeks ago, that we will have a winter break, so it means we will not be there — it will be the kids who play that game because they cannot deal with us like nobody cares about it. “I know it is not very popular, but that’s the way I see it and, how I said, the Premier League asked us to respect the winter break and that’s what we do it. If then the FA do not respect it then we cannot change.” Liverpool went out of the League Cup in December when a team fielding five debutants and an average age of 19 was beaten 5-0 by Aston Villa. Critchley was also in charge for that game with Klopp and the first team away in Qatar for the Club World Cup. The move by Klopp puts further pressure on the Football Association to do away with replays from the FA Cup. For the first time this season all fifth round matches will be played midweek and go straight to extra-time if they finish in a draw. Manchester City manager Pep Guardiola has also called for an end to replays, while Brentford coach Thomas Frank said he would have done everything in his power to ensure his side’s 1-0 defeat to Leicester on Saturday did not end in a draw. “I think that is part of killing one of the finest cup tournaments in the world,” said Frank. “They can kill it a little bit with replays. I don’t get it.” — AFP.