The Chronicle Wedding of . . . Makhosana Mguni, seventh born of Mrs Hilda Mguni of 91 Nketa 6, Bulawayo to Belinda Nyoni. Wedding date . . . 26 December 2019 We chose. . . Grand Vista because it is stunning. The lawn is green. It is spacious and is fairly distant from the hustle and bustle of the CBD. The whole structure and design of the venue is amazing, promoting a romantic atmosphere. How did you meet . . . We actually met six years ago. I used to see her in the neighbourhood when I was with my friends. I’d tell them that I liked her and she had captured my heart. However, I couldn’t gather the strength to approach her when we were in Nketa 6. When I saw her at Chicken Inn, it was a perfect moment as she wasn’t with her friends. I asked for her number and we became friends for a while. We became so close that I couldn’t spend a day without seeing her and before I knew it, we fell in love some months later. I relocated to South Africa two years later where I’m now based and we kept in touch on the phone, through calls and WhatsApp. Once in a while, I’d send her gifts. How did he propose . . . We had gone for lunch at Chicken Inn Drive through on December 26 2018. It was a normal day and I thought that it was just him spoiling me. However, in the middle of the lunch, Makho went on his knee, whipped out a ring and asked for my hand in marriage. I said yes. Challenges . . . We had just but a handful of them. From the day we got engaged we had quite a number of well-wishers as well as our beloved families and friends pouring in to cater for whatever we needed to have a beautiful wedding. We had companies and individuals like Chicken Inn, Black Shark Security, Mrs Michaels for the Cake, Chelsea for the cupcakes, Ntando make-up artist, Praise hair dresser, MC Nyasha and Bkay from Skyz Metro FM, Shotey for the Groom’s suit, The Look Zimbabwe for the Bride’s dress and Mqhele Mguni the choreographer. We had hired a wedding planner and our families would hold meetings every now and then so even though I was in South Africa we still managed to get things done in time. Wedding dress . . . Mermaid dress tailored by The Look Zimbabwe. Wedding Colour . . . Blush Pink, navy blue and a touch of Gold. Bridal team . . . Comprised 14 members. Makhosini Mguni as best man and Portia Dube as best girl. Cake . . . Five-tier fruit cake baked by Mrs Michaels from Harare. Favourite part of the wedding . . . It was at the ceremony, when I was saying my vows to my sweetheart. My Pastor Apostle P Ndlovu had cultivated an atmosphere full of love and taught good on how love endures against all odds. I felt ready to love her for a thousand years. When it was my opportunity to say my vows, they came right from the very core of my heart and it was a thing of beauty. Most touching speech . . . Was from my uncle Vuyo Mguni. Guest list . . . 200 guests (Strictly by invitation) Photography and video . . . Was from Themba Chirwa and Ricky Puzzle Moments. MC . . . Bkay from Skyz Metro FM and Nyasha (uDokotela Wabantu) Entertainment . . . DJ Future love sound, bridal team and Khaya arts. Budget . . . N/A Honeymoon . . . Victoria Falls at Kingdom Hotel. – If you want your wedding to be featured on our Wedding of the Week column, please feel free to get in touch with the Showbiz Desk on 09-888871-9, 0774 007 233 or send an email to bnndlovu1984@gmail.com.