The Chronicle Columbus Mabika and Yeukai Tazira, Harare Bureau The Civil Protection Unit (CPU) says it is on high alert for any disasters, including floods or any unexpected eventuality. This came after the Meteorological Services Department (MSD) warned of isolated wind thunderstorms, which may cause floods and damage to property, to hit the country in the coming week. CPU director Mr Nathan Nkomo said the CPU was geared to respond and effectively cope with any eventuality. “All our committees are aware and high on alert, our communities in those respective areas mentioned have been activated,” he said. “Provincial, District Development Coordinators are to ensure all Civil Protection Structures at sub national levels including schools are aware of this flooding alert,” said Mr Nkomo. He said together with the MSD they will be closely monitoring the situation. Mr Nkomo said the CPU was in the process of beefing up financial disbursements to provincial committees. He said drawing huge lessons and experiences from the unprecedented destructive behaviour of Cyclone Idai last year, they will be carrying out awareness programmes for people living in the vicinity to flood prone areas. MSD deputy director Weather Forecasting, Mrs Linia Gopo warned people in Manicaland, Midlands and Matabeleland provinces to brace for floods and storms in coming days as the country expects thunderstorms. “Soon isolated thunderstorms may be experienced in Matabeleland North, Mashonaland, northern part of the Midlands and northern parts of Manicaland. These thunderstorms will not bring much rainfall, they will bring showers that will be thundering in places, severe, accompanied by lightning, hail and strong winds,” she said. Mrs Gopo also warned that the winds will be damaging and expected to blow roof tops. This could be bad news for Manicaland province, which is still agonising over the deadly Cyclone Idai which left hundreds dead and others missing while property worth millions was also destroyed. In June last year following Cyclone Idai, Government developed satellite generated flood management frameworks aimed at establishing proactive disaster risk management systems. The framework is based on a geo-database which uses modern technology to better understand flooding, its mitigation and preparedness.