The Chronicle Chronicle Reporters THE Bulawayo City Council (BCC) is considering strengthening anti-littering by-laws targeting residents dumping disposable nappies. Ward 28 councillor Cde Kidwell Mujuru said this yesterday during the provincial clean up campaign held in Cowdray Park near TM Pick and Pay Shop. Cde Mujuru was representing the Bulawayo Mayor Clr Solomon Mguni. “As we were cleaning up this area, we noted that residents are failing to properly handle disposable nappies. Dumping of disposable nappies is a serious challenge for the city of Bulawayo. Therefore, as the City Fathers we are considering tightening our bylaws to severely penalise those dumping these disposable nappies which are a health hazard for the city and its residents,” said Cde Mujuru. He said council will however consult residents on the best way of coming up with the by-law as consultation has become a critical component of governance. Cde Mujuru said residents should embrace the clean up campaign as it is meant to benefit them instead of officials. He said residents should be conscientised about the importance of keeping their environments clean. The Environmental Management Agency (Ema), Zimbabwe National Army, police, BCC officials, residents and private sector organisations participated in the clean up exercise. In Matabeleland South the Minister of State for Provincial Affairs, Cde Abednico Ncube led the main clean up exercise which was conducted in the Gwanda CBD. He was joined by officials from ZRP, EMA, local Government, various government departments and community members. Addressing stakeholders to mark the end of the clean up exercise Cde Ncube urged people to ensure that their surroundings remained clean. “Let’s make cleaning a habit and let’s not wait for the first Friday of every month. Let’s desist from littering the streets but rather let’s dispose litter properly. Thank you all for participating in this programme and taking heed of the message from our President who launched this clean up exercise,” he said. Various Government departments and institutions also cleaned their work premises while residents also cleaned their various wards. In Matabeleland North, the clean up exercise was led by Ema, Greenline Africa, Environment Africa and other partners. In Binga those who cleaned around the rural district council, District Development Coordinator offices, terminus and along Freedom Square road included council workers, local government workers, police, workers from the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure Development, Central Mechanical and Engineering Department and Zimbabwe National Army. In Hwange stakeholders cleaned around the central business district and Number 1 rank while police cleaned around their camp and along the highway near the police camp. In Lupane various stakeholders cleaned around Lupane Centre while in Victoria Falls Greenline Africa led the clean up around Victoria Falls Primary School and surrounding areas and Jafuta Siding to clear the mess caused by party makers during the recent Victoria Falls Carnival. Across town the Victoria Falls Municipality partnered with TM, Safari Lodge, police and some churches. — @DubeMatutu