The Chronicle Michell Zvanyanya, Chronicle Reporter BULAWAYO’S water woes are set to worsen if the city’s dams do not receive significant inflows within the next three weeks as council has indicated that it may be forced to decommission Lower Ncema Dam. Dam water levels have dropped to 35 percent and if the city’s water situation does not improve, a third dam will be decommissioned leaving Bulawayo relying on three dams from its six supply dams. Last year, council decommissioned two of its main supply dams, Umzingwane Dam and Upper Ncema. In a statement on Friday, council Director of Engineering Services, Engineer Simela Dube said: “Lower Ncema is sitting just above 10 percent of its capacity meaning it could be decommissioned in the next three weeks if we do not get any inflows from the current promising rains,” he said. A dam is usually decommissioned after it reaches 10 percent of its capacity to allow it to sustain its underwater life. Although the local authority did not reveal the immediate impact of the latest development, recently Bulawayo Mayor, Councillor Solomon Mguni in his New Year’s speech said despite the deteriorating water situation the council has implemented measures to stretch water supply as the commissioning of a third supply dam looms. He said the implemented measures, one of them being the 96-hour water shedding programme will ensure that the water supply lasts up to April next year. “Due to the El Nino and El Nina effects and climate change, water supply challenges are currently being faced by the residents of Bulawayo. “We remain hopeful for bountiful rains that will ensure that we provide adequate water supply to the residents. Our overall dam levels as of today are at 35,4 percent. The 96-hour water shedding schedule will help extend water supplies by up to 15 months,” said Cllr Mguni. He said the local authority will also finalise the Bulawayo Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Projects (BWSSIP) which will result in the upgrading and renewal of water pipes in the city’s wards as well as replacement of 18 000 non-functional water meters in the Magwegwe and criterion reservoir zones to ensure the water shedding schedule does not worsen. — @michellzvanyanyan2