The Chronicle Brenda Zinyuke, Court Reporter A WOMAN from Bulawayo allegedly defrauded a home seeker of R50 000 and US$12 000 on two occasions on claims that she was selling a house and a stand. Vaina Moyo (60) of Barham Green suburb allegedly duped Mr Kudzanai Blessed Mbengo whose residential address was not revealed. Moyo works at Landwey Construction located at corner 12th Avenue and Fife Street in the city. She was not asked to plead to two counts of fraud when she appeared before Bulawayo magistrate Mr Lizwe Jamela. She was remanded out of custody on her own cognisance for the first count to January 21 this year while investigations into the second count are still underway. Prosecuting, Mr Denmark Chihombe said sometime in April in 2018, Mr Mbengo contacted Moyo asking her if she had any residential stands for sale. “The accused person told the complainant that she had one stand in Emganwini suburb. Arrangements were made and the complainant was shown stand number 374 Hlalo Projects in Emganwini which the accused person said belonged to her and was selling at R50 000,” he said. Mr Mbengo allegedly deposited the money and Moyo allegedly promised to have the agreement of sale signed within a few days. This never happened and Mr Mbengo reported the matter to the police. Sometime in February in the same year, Mr Mbengo allegedly also approached Moyo intending to buy a house. “The accused person told the complainant she had a two roomed house at number 22278 in Pumula South suburb and it was being sold at US$12 000.The complainant paid US$9 000 for the house and an agreement of sale was signed,” said the prosecutor. The two allegedly agreed that Mr Mbengo was going to move into the house after paying the balance in three months’ time. He allegedly finished the payment but was told that the house needed to be renovated and he was going to move in once it was finished. This never happened and Mr Mbengo reported the matter to the police on December 27 last year leading to Moyo’s arrest.-@zinyuke98