The Chronicle Brenda Zinyuke, Court Reporter A MEMBER of a six-man gang that allegedly pounced on a mine owner at his Bulawayo house and robbed him of US$30 000 cash, 1kg gold ore, cellphones and other valuables, yesterday appeared in court. Mehluli Ncube (39) also known as Mamba of Old Pumula suburb was in the company of Fungai Mpofu, Nqobizitha Nyathi, Prince Mpumelelo Dube, Mgcini Ndlovu all whose ages and residential addresses could not be established together with Rabson Chatikobo who is in custody for other robbery cases when they robbed Mr Peter Jonathan Pretorius. Mr Pretorius of Famona suburb, is the owner of Pretel 4 Mine in Esigodini. Ncube was not asked to plead when he appeared before Bulawayo magistrate Mr Lizwe Jamela. He was remanded in custody to January 22. Prosecuting, Mr Denmark Chihombe said on June 21 last year at around 7PM, Mr Pretorius arrived from his mine driving his Nissan Hardbody vehicle. He opened the gate, drove in and as he went back to close it, he was approached by Ncube and his accomplices. “The accused persons pointed a pistol at the complainant before dragging him towards the back door of the main house. They struck him with a crow bar and step ladder on his head,” Mr Chihombe said. The accused then gagged Mr Pretorius with a belt, tortured and attempted to strangle him demanding to be shown where his money was. The gang allegedly proceeded to the main door and pointed a gun at Mr Pretorius’ wife while they left him outside the house with two of the accused persons who were threatening to kill him if he did not disclose where the money was. Ncube and his accomplices allegedly assaulted Mrs Pretorius with a crow bar forcing her to show them where the gun cabinet and safe were. “The accused persons took the safe containing 1kg of gold ore sample, US$30 000 cash, necklaces, two gold rings and three cellphones,” said Mr Chihombe. The matter was reported to the police. The following day at around 6AM, police recovered a stolen firearm certificate at Ncube’s house in Pumula suburb. At around 9AM on the same day, police also recovered a dumped firearm along Old Khami road. “On June 24, police officers received information to the effect that Ncube was at his homestead in Insuza. They reacted to the information but did not find the accused person as it was alleged that he had fled to South Africa” said Mr Chihombe. Police recovered six necklaces and US$900 from his homestead and he was arrested few days later. — @zinyuke98