The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter FC Platinum coach Pieter de Jongh says he has a good feeling about today’s Group B Caf Champions League match against Sudanese side Al Hilal at Barbourfields Stadium which he hopes will see Pure Platinum Play register their maiden group stage win. The Zimbabwean champions are already out of the race for a knockout stage appearance while the visitors need to avoid a defeat so as to stay in contention for a quarterfinal berth ahead of their last home match against Al Ahly. Al Hilal are third on the table with six points, a point behind the Egyptian giants and two points behind leaders Etoile Du Sahel of Tunisia. “I have a good feeling about tomorrow’s game that we will post a good result. We have no pressure because we are already out but we go for the encounter to collect maximum points,” said the Dutchman who was accompanied to the press conference by goalkeeper Petros Mhari during yesterday’s press conference. He said they have a proper game plan for the match. “Obviously we can’t disclose our tactics to the media but my players know what is expected of them, they know what they should do when in possession and attacking as well as when they lose possession, they know that because we laid out a proper plan. I know our opponents very well and we respect them as well,” he said. De Jongh once again urged his players to enjoy themselves and not to be under pressure. Speaking at the same conference goalkeeper Mhari said they were looking forward to a good game and a positive result against the Sudanese. “We are out but for us as a club is a learning curve and last week’s one all draw against African giants Al Ahly was a big boost to our morale,” said Mhari. In the reverse fixture back in Khartoum, FC Platinum lost 1-2  but had they been more accurate in front of goal, the result could have been different. De Jongh is likely to start with the same line up that did duty against the eight times African champions Al Ahly two weeks ago. Goalkeeper Mhari will be in between the sticks with big Lawrence Mhlanga and William Stima thrust in the central defence while Tawana Chikore and Raphael Muduviwa will operate from the right and left back of the defence respectively. Midfield enforcer Kelvin Madzongwe, Last Jesi, Democratic Republic of Congo dribbling menace Guyva Nsiala and Rainsome Pavari will operate from the crucial engineroom area that will see them supplying the forward duo of Stanley Ngala and hard running Petros Chikwende.