The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter BULAWAYO missed on a rare opportunity to have two Fifa international centre referees this year when Pilan Ncube was struck off the list while Prince Mathumo got the nod to be among the country’s elite referees. Ncube failed a fitness test that was held at Elangeni Training Centre in September last year. Fifa instructors Felix Tangawarima and Gregory Krzosek from Poland who is also a fitness expert conducted the exercise. “I am personally disappointed really by Ncube’s failure to pass the fitness test. I am disturbed because this test was also to select our referees for the Fifa panel and this means he will not be on the list next year. It’s sad, really sad indeed. “He said it was a pulled muscle that made him fail to finish on time,” Tangawarima told this publication then. Mathumo was the only new entrant in the list from Zimbabwe for the 2020 year, joining the likes of Brighton Chimene who became a Fifa referee last year, Lawrence Zimondi (2016) and the longest serving Norman Matemera, who has been on the Fifa panel since 2010. Zimbabwe had 38 male centre referees on the Zifa panel list last year and 42 assistants who include four ladies. Only six ladies were on the Zifa panel as centre referees. “We will soon be announcing the list for the 2020 year, its not given that all that were on the list last year will be considered as they are a number of factors that we look at in our endeavour to improve performance and instil professionalism,” said Zimbabwe Referees Committee chairperson Bryton Malandule. Thanks Nyauye and Chipo Mayimbo remain the only two female referees on the Fifa International list. They were promoted in 2015 and 2018 respectively. Thomas Kusona, Luckson Mhara, Salani Ncube, Tafadzwa Nkala, Edgar Rumeck and Brighton Nyika are the male assistant referees on the international list while Bulawayo’s Faith Mloyi, Stella Ruvinga and Claris Simango complete the women’s list. “Each year, FIFA publishes a list of referees, a list of assistant referees, a list of futsal referees and a list of beach soccer referees who are eligible to officiate at international matches. These lists come into effect on 1 January and are valid until 31 December of the same year. The Fifa referees committee shall draw up the lists of international referees, assistant referees, futsal referees and beach soccer referees in compliance with the articles of the Fifa statutes. Each year, the Fifa Referees Committee shall request each member association to nominate candidates whom they consider qualified to act as an international referee, assistant referee, futsal referee or beach soccer referee. The deadline to nominate international referees for each upcoming year is 1 October,” says Fifa.