The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Court Reporter TWENTY tenants of a flat in Bulawayo’s Central Business District face eviction over a debt of more than $17 000 in rates and water bills. Some of the affected tenants had their household property attached by the Messenger of Court after failing to pay the money, which also includes monthly rentals. They failed to pay Bulawayo City Council $17 861,43 with each tenant owing the local authority about $840. It was not stated how much they owe in monthly rentals. Kwanele Lutshaba, Juliet Musekiwa, Blessing Kandido, Thando Tshili, Emmanuel Matirongo, Marlene Sparrow, Darlington Dube, Simbarashe Nindi, Rebecca Shava, Pascalina Mwila, Perfect Moyo, Francis Murape, Jephias Dzingo, Simbarashe Kadzere, Paula Moyo, Gracious Moyo, Tadios Munyimani, Ruth Mkhwananzi, Walter Dhlamini and Sandlasenkosi Tshuma were ordered to vacate Merano Flat following an application for a default judgment by the owners of the property, Hotchland Zimbabwe, through their lawyer Mr Bruce  Masamvu. In separate rulings by different Bulawayo magistrates, the 20 tenants have since been issued with eviction orders. The Messenger of Court has also issued writs of ejectment. According to summons filed at the Bulawayo magistrates’ courts last week, the tenants who were cited as defendants, entered into a lease agreement with Hotchland Zimbabwe t/a Bessies Flats to occupy Merano Flat situated between 10th and 11th Avenue along Josiah Tongogara Street. “In terms of the agreement, the defendants would pay water consumption bill which would be divided among the tenants with each paying $60 per month to the Bulawayo City Council. The plaintiff (Hotchland Zimbabwe) is entitled to claim the unpaid water bill as the owner of the property,” read the summons. Hotchland Zimbabwe said the tenants violated the terms of the lease agreement by failing to pay the water bills. “Despite demand, the defendants have refused, failed or neglected to pay the money being arrear water bills as at November 2019 in breach of the lease agreement which therefore warrants cancellation of the lease agreement and eviction,” said Hotchland Zimbabwe. — @mashnets