The Chronicle Mejury Magaya, Midlands Reporter A GWERU magistrate has said copper cables theft is a serious crime at a time when the country is facing erratic electricity supply and such offenders deserve custodial sentences. Gweru Regional magistrate Mrs Phathekile Msipa said this as she was sentencing a Gweru man to 10 years in prison for stealing more than 21 kilogrammes of copper cables valued at $8 000. Johannes Tsikirai (28), in the company of his friend who is at large stole 21,1 kilogrammes of copper cables valued at $8 000 belonging to National Railways of Zimbabwe (NRZ) at Dabuka. Tsikirai had pleaded not guilty to unlawfully cutting, damaging, destroying and interfering with copper cables for the generation, transmission and distribution and supply of electricity when he appeared before Mrs Msipa. He was convicted and sentenced to an effective 10 years in prison. In passing the sentence, Mrs Msipa said Tsikirai had planned how to commit the crime as he had tools to use and went to Dabuka at 2AM under the cover of darkness. He said Tsikirai committed a serious offence especially when the country is facing electricity problems hence he deserved a custodial sentence. Prosecutor Mr Kelvin Guvheya said that on January 12 this year at around 2AM, Admire Chitsunge who is employed by NRZ as a Loss Control Officer together with his workmates Taridzo Mavirima and Nicholas Nyoni were patrolling at NRZ premises at Dabuka. “During their patrol they noticed Tsikirai and his colleague who is still at large digging underground near the railway line,” he said. The prosecutor said Chitsunge and his colleagues drew closer to find out was taking place and noticed Tsikirai cutting copper cables that they put in a wheelbarrow. They managed to apprehend Tsikirai but his colleague fled to an unknown destination. The court heard that a pick, shovel, hacksaw and a wheelbarrow which were being used by Tsikirai were recovered at the scene. The recovered copper cables were taken to Zimpost for weighing and weighed 21,1 kilogrammes and their value was calculated to be  $8 000.