The Chronicle Making decisions about your child’s schooling under current economic environment is not easy. Not at all! The irony is you just must. Whatever decision you make has an impact on your child’s future. We are convinced that it has always been your desire to see your child enroll with a school where s/he is taught and assisted at all school times in the different subjects s/he is doing. The truth is every school could be focused on just that but could be incapacitated! Success is planned . . . A renowned writer remarked that hope is not a strategy. Another one added failing to plan is planning to fail! These are not clichés but important points to note as you choose a school for your child and subsequently interacts with the school authorities and teachers to enhance your child’s learning environment. The relationship you as parents have with your school and vice versa always must  be characterized by mutual trust so that together you chorus, “This is our school, Let peace and progress dwell here!” That way both parties work to achieve success for the learner. Our Focus Our focus is the learner. The school enrolls students from a very wide background. In that regard it is important for teachers to be sensitive to needs of these learners. Our teachers are trained and motivated towards reconciling these disparate diverse backgrounds. We have a team of sensitive, responsive teachers who will make sure that learners are given all the assistance they might need in order to make sure that their stay at Trust is as comfortable, fruitful and successful as possible. Learners’ different needs –Our one Focus Learners have different learning abilities and needs. Our classes are small and manageable. Our teachers can give individual attention to the students. Our Curriculum – Cambridge Syllabi -ZIMSEC Syllabi – Sciences –  Commercials – Arts & Humanities It’s in our DNA – To turn fails into passes -To understand the learner’s academic aptitude – To assist learners in their studies at all times – To give learners career guidance CLINICAL COACHING The objective is to assist leaners according to their areas of need. Teachers make a comprehensive needs assessment of each learner as learner join the school. At diagnosis, individual learners openly talk to their teachers and problems are identified, proper tuition and learning strategies designed. Our desired outcome is to turn failure to success. FLEXIBLE LEARNING ARRANGEMENTS Our learners have a choice to either be formal (uniform) or non-formal (non-uniform). Lesson times also vary across day, evening and weekend. CONDITIONAL ENTRY TO A-LEVEL Our conditional entry for Lower Sixth Form allows those with less than five O level passes to proceed to A level whilst supplementing their O-level SUBJECT CHOICES We use the career-oriented subject selection approach. Through this approach we sit down with a learner at whatever level to appreciate his/her career orientation. Working with the learner and/or parents we select subject inclined towards his/her preferred career direction FEES PAYMENT ARRANGEMENTS There are flexible payment plans for learners who cannot afford to pay off all their fees at once ONE-ON-ONE CLASSES (PERSONALISED TUITION) One-on-one lessons are tailor-made to cater for those who find it difficult to learn with other Our history Our history Trust Academy Bulawayo High School is wholly owned by a developmental agency or a non-governmental organisation called Zimbabwe Project Trust (ZimPro). It is part of the Trust Academy brand.