The Chronicle Sharon Buwerimwe, Court Reporter A SUSPECTED thief from Bulawayo has been arrested for allegedly stealing $2 160 from a parked vehicle in Pumula suburb during two raids in one night. Vusumuzi Moyo (20) from Pumula North suburb allegedly sneaked into Mr Bhekimpilo Sibanda (32)’s yard at night and broke into the vehicle that had cash. The court heard Moyo was a serial thief in the neighbourhood who would wake up at night, sneak into residents’ houses, break into cars before making off with property ranging from cellphones and car radios. Moyo pleaded not guilty to two counts of theft before Western Commonage magistrate Ms Gladmore Mushove. He was remanded in custody to tomorrow. Moyo said he did not steal from the vehicle and blamed evil spirits. “Your worship, I really don’t have a clear answer or know what happened. I think it is the work of evil spirits. I don’t remember breaking into that vehicle,” he said. For the State, Mr Keneth Shava said on November 13 and December 6 last year, Moyo broke into Mr Sibanda’s vehicle using an unknown object and stole cash. “The accused person broke into the complainant’s yellow Honda Fit that was parked in his yard and stole $2 000 that was hidden in driver’s seat cover pocket and went away,” he said. “On second count, the accused person used the same method to break into the complainant’s vehicle and took $160. “The complainant who was asleep in his house, heard some noises outside and saw the accused person.” Mr Shava said Moyo ran away and dropped his cell phone after realising that he had been seen. The court heard that Moyo came back after an hour looking for his cell phone at Mr Sibanda’s home and found a crowd waiting for him. Mr Sibanda told a court that Moyo came around 2AM to steal from his motor vehicle. “I heard sounds outside and I peeped through the window. I saw the accused person near my car and I shouted ‘thief’ and he ran away. I decided not to sleep and the accused person came back again, broke into my vehicle and stole cash. As he was trying to escape, he dropped his cell phone and came third time now looking for his cell phone. My neighbours were already up and we managed to apprehend the thief,” he said. The matter was reported to the police leading to Moyo’s arrest. — @sharonbuwe