The Chronicle Andile Tshuma I am yet to understand people who like imposing their own understanding of what is good, what is acceptable and what is not on others. I’ve seen people post and I’ve stolen this post myself once or twice about how rude it is to exclaim that someone has put on weight whenever you meet after a long time, as if you had at some point agreed on a particular weight. I just do not get it. While it is good to maintain a healthy weight, to exercise and keep fit, it is rude and insensitive and outright irrational to assume that we will all wear the same dress size. We have different genes, our biological make up is different, that is one of the beautiful things that make up all of us and we should celebrate the diversity. Now, what was quite interesting, or saddening rather this week is the amount of negative energy, and outright hate that some of us ladies, and some men were throwing at one of our sisters on social media. If you are big on Twitter, you may have come across the hashtag #RuvhenekoChallenge. People made an issue of her so called ‘naked’ face after she posted pictures of herself without any make up on. Well, most of the pictures of her that we often see on social media are mainly of her official appearances at events, and it is almost obvious that she would have dressed up and dolled up for the occasion. Now, she posts a picture of a make-up free version of herself and the female brigade goes to town and back about how shocked they are to see how different she looks from when she has applied make up. Coming from women and aimed at another woman, I think it was unfair, unnecessary and somehow had a little bit of jealousy infused in it. Personally, I’m not big on make up, I prefer my natural look just as I am not big on weaves and all. Quite on the minimalist side, I prefer my locks 24/7. I can count the times I’ve had a complete face beat; they must be less than five, two of them at friend’s weddings where I had to ‘look the part’ and blend with other bridesmaids. It’s not that I hate make up, I just do not have the time, and probably the skill to do it right by myself. I however think it’s one of those things that every girl must know how to do, and do well. People might have different opinions on make up but I feel natural is the way to go as I feel happier with my after shower look, which does not require those long interactions with the mirror every morning. I do not at any point feel that ladies who wear make-up Sunday right through to Saturday are less women. Bless them and their skills, always looking on point, elegant and flawless 24/7. They are beautiful as they are, with their makeup, and there are some whom I wish their close friends and family could be honest and tell them that they are not doing this make up doll up game right, there’s always something amiss with the eyebrows, the choice of lip colour or the shade of the foundation. Sometimes they overdo things and their faces look very busy. That’s a different case. I think Ruvheneko Parirenyatwa is beautiful. Just like every other woman. We are all beautiful, with our flaws. I think she is an inspiration to so many young women with her achievements, and I feel that as women, there is a lot to take from people like her, for ourselves, our little sisters and our daughters. She is what some will call a trailblazer. So, the fact that she posted a picture without make up on shows that she is very confident of herself with or without the make-up and does not need to think twice about the perfect look before hitting the share button, should be appreciated. Why then look for flaws? I liked how she took all the criticism and made lemonade with the Twitter thread and #RuvhenekoChallenge where women were sharing their make-up free faces. I like to identify myself with the women on that thread, supportive, loving and confident for days. From what the ‘famous picture’ looks like, she was out and about and doing some kind of sporty activity, perhaps hiking as the background looks a bit like the Table Mountain in South Africa. So, I wonder how someone can go for that activity all dolled up, imagine what happens to the layers of powders, foundation and mascaras when you start sweating. This little Twitter drama showed that as women, we are not supportive of each other and we are often keen on looking for flaws and not celebrating the beautiful things in us. Instead of commenting on how ‘different and less pretty’ she looked, did anyone not notice the flawless skin, the pretty dimples and the hearty smile? Well, I did. Women are often said to suffer from the PHD syndrome, the pull her down syndrome and some people say sometimes jealous women will rather have a man at the top and would plot the downfall of one of their own. This would need a whole article; however, it is one of the things we need to be addressed in sisterhood. We can be our best friends and we could be our worst enemies. Until we engage again, let’s stop hating and minimise expectations from others. Also, let us not prescribe our own ideas of beauty and confidence to others. – Let’s keep the conversation going on 0778 502 449 or andilebongani1@gmail.com