The Chronicle Michell Zvanyanya, Chronicle Reporter THE Environmental Management Agency (EMA) has urged manufacturers and product users to be responsible for the disposal of solid waste that is threatening the environment. In a statement , EMA national spokesperson Ms Amkela Sidange expressed concern over the rampant illegal dumping of solid waste such as disposable nappies and plastics. She said manufacturers of such products should adopt effective waste management practices to reduce accumulation of residual waste. “The Agency remains ready to lobby for the banning of anything that is of environmental concern only after all other presumed sustainable waste management options have been exhausted, or when the integrity of the environment is suddenly under threat. To that end, the Agency is calling upon both manufacturers and end users to adopt best management practices so as to reduce accumulation of residual waste in the environment,” said Ms Sidange. She said disposable nappies would be a hazard in the environment for centuries as they constitute four percent of waste generated in urban areas annually. According to greenmatters.com a conventional disposable diaper cannot be recycled, takes at least 500 years to decompose and an average baby uses about 3 000 diapers during its first year of life. Ms Sidange said disposable nappies make up a larger component of waste at illegal dumping sites that have remained a challenge in the country. She said there is need for formulation of lasting solutions to deal with disposable nappies and educating members of the public on how to properly dispose them is one of them. “In such circumstances the Agency remains committed to its mandate of reducing pollution and protecting the environment through promptly raising the flag when the integrity of the environment is likely to be compromised and timeously guide the nation through inclusive participation in finding lasting solutions to environmental problems,” she added.-@michellzvanyanyan2.