The Chronicle Walter Mswazie, Masvingo Correspondent About 80 percent of farmers in Masvingo are taking advantage of the prevailing wet spell to replant after their crops succumbed to moisture stress in previous months, a Government official has said. In an interview yesterday, Crop and Livestock provincial officer Mr Aaron Muchazivepi said it was refreshing to note that the obtaining rains that started early this month were benefitting most areas in the province. “The situation on the ground in terms of crop situation is now encouraging. However, most farmers constituting at least 80 percent are doing replanting as their first and second crop is almost a write off,” said Mr Muchazivepi. “This also affected Command Agriculture beneficiaries who had benefitted from loans from the banks.” Mr Muchazivepi said indications were that the rains were spreading in the province. “Our assessment has revealed that most farmers have their crops germinating after replanting. We hope the moisture content will increase and last a bit longer. “If the rains continue falling as it is expected, we envisage a better farming season as a sizeable number of farmers will realise a better yield. The season is going to be shorter so we urge farmers to always put their shoulders on the wheel,” he said. “Crops at early stages should not be allowed to compete for sunlight or moisture with weeds as it compromises quality of yields and causes crop failure.” Speaking to our sister paper The Herald recently Zimbabwe Farmers Union (ZFU) Masvingo regional manager Mr Jeremiah Chimwanda said the rains had improved the state of the early planted maize in areas such as Ndanga and Jichidza in Zaka, Ngundu in Chivi, Gutu West and parts of Masvingo East covering Mbungo and Rippling Waters. He said most farmers in the eastern parts of Gutu, Northern Chiredzi, Northern Chivi and South parts of Masvingo were now planting anew after their first and second crops failed. He urged farmers to concentrate more on short season varieties and small grains that are drought tolerant.-@walterbmswazie2