The Chronicle Meghan Markle has flown to Canada leaving Harry to deal with the fall-out of their announcement to “step back” as senior royals. The Duchess has headed back to be with baby Archie, who stayed in the country as she and Harry returned to the UK. Sources reportedly told the Mail she “had not” planned on staying in the UK after their six-week Christmas break. Harry has also told the Queen and dad Charles he will follow his wife to Canada as soon as possible, although he does have an engagement in the diary next Thursday. The Queen and Charles have asked royal staff to find a workable solution to the split, after senior royals were “hurt” by Harry and Meghan’s decision. Yesterday a spokesman for the Sussexes confirmed Meghan’s swift return to North America. Harry also faces an awkward return to Buckingham Palace when he hosts the draw there for the Rugby League World Cup. The development comes just hours after the Royal family released a statement saying they would be working with Harry and Meghan in forming a plan on what was yesterday described as a “complicated issue”. A Palace statement said: “The Queen, the Prince of Wales and Duke of Cambridge have directed their teams to work together at pace with the government and the Sussex household to find workable solutions.” Palace sources say the directive is to sort the situation out “in days not weeks”. Sources close to the family said the couple had been planning the move as far back as Spring 2019. It has also been claimed the couple chose to disregard pleas from their closest aides on Monday night that they should hold off from releasing their statement. The bombshell announcement read: “After many months of reflection and internal discussions, we have chosen to make a transition this year in starting to carve out a progressive new role within this institution. “We intend to step back as ‘senior’ members of the Royal Family and work to become financially independent, while continuing to fully support Her Majesty The Queen. “It is with your encouragement, particularly over the last few years, that we feel prepared to make this adjustment. “We now plan to balance our time between the United Kingdom and North America, continuing to honour our duty to The Queen, the Commonwealth, and our patronages.” When in the UK, the couple reside at their Windsor home, Frogmore Cottage — which was renovated last year at the taxpayers’ cost of £2.4million. Renovations on the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge’s Apartment 1A in Kensington Palace reportedly cost £4.5 million, while work on their home Anmer Hall in Norfolk ran to £1.5 million. They came under scrutiny over the summer for their use of private jets, which were paid for by the couple and Elton John. Before she married into the family Meghan, who had a successful acting career, had a personal fortune of around £3.8m, according to The Independent. — The Mirror