The Chronicle Sharon Buwerimwe, Court Reporter TWO elderly women from Bulawayo heaved a sigh of relief after they were acquitted of allegedly stealing US$17 160, R4 800 and RTGS$14 000 from their burial society. It had been alleged that Dorcas Machengo (72) and Evelyn Chapepa (78) from Magwegwe suburb betrayed the trust bestowed on them by Thandanani Burial Society. Machengo was the secretary while Chapepa was the chairlady and treasurer. They pleaded not guilty to theft of trust property before Western Commonage magistrate Ms Tancy Dube on Monday. The magistrate said the State failed to prove that Machengo and Chapepa stole from the burial fund as the audit report was inconclusive. “The court considered evidence that was presented and it’s clear that the accused persons didn’t commit the alleged offence. The report only showed money coming in the burial society not out. The books that had records were lost also, there is no evidence that the accused persons took the money. They are therefore acquitted and discharged,” she ruled. The State represented by Mr Tapiwa Solani said the matter came to light in December 2018 when some bereaved members of the group approached the grannies seeking money for funeral expenses. “Society members contributed money in foreign currency which was kept by the accused persons. The members’ contribution increased from US$3 to US$5. “During that same month members needed money for funeral expenses but Machengo and Chapepa failed to produce the money,” he said. Mr Solani said an audit was carried out and it was discovered that part of the money was missing from the coffers. He said Machengo and Chapepa had promised to return the money but failed and members reported the matter to the police leading to their arrest. Ms Joyce Gumangei, a member of the burial society, said: “After discovering that our burial money was missing, I asked the accused persons and they confessed that they took it and said they will pay back. “One of the accused persons said she wanted to help her son who was in South Africa and would double the money when they pay back. Up until now we haven’t got our money and we decided to report them to police.”-@sharonbuwe