The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Binga beauty, Celine Sialumba was on Saturday night crowned Miss Summer Strides 2020 at a pageant that was held in Bulawayo. The contest held at Lavinia Gardens marked the return of the pageant after 13 years. A confident Sialumba beat 12 other contestants and won US$500, a contract with South Africa-based Heads Modelling Agency, a Strides Modelling Salon nail-do for a year and a hamper from Proton. First princess was Ellain Qhawe Ncube from Harare and second princess Brenda Mudereri from Gweru. The 24-year-old Sialumba who has roots from Binga, Matabeleland North, said she was honoured to have won. “I’m so excited at being crowned Miss Summer Strides as I didn’t think I was going to win. It was my wish to win though, like any other model on the night especially knowing that there was a modelling contract with Heads Modelling Agency on offer,” said Sialumba. Spotting a natural short haircut, Sialumba said she wanted to show people that with natural looks, one could make it in the modelling industry. “I want to tell the girl child that they should be proud of their natural looks. You don’t have to enhance your looks to fit in the community and be accepted by society.” The beauty said she started modelling while at preschool where she participated at Miss Pink and Blue North End 2003 but did not win. When she was in Grade Six, she gave it another try when she participated in the Miss Kumalo Primary School. Unfortunately, she did not win again. Her first taste of glory was at St James’ High School where she participated in a Miss Interact contest and was crowned Miss Personality. At the beginning of her second year at Lupane State University where she studied Bachelor of Commerce Honours Degree in Finance and Accounting, she was crowned Miss Lupane State University. This year, she made top 12 at the Miss Tourism World Zimbabwe finals held last month. Through her modelling journey, Sialumba said she has learnt to persevere. Entertainment at the event was provided by the diminutive and talented Novuyo Seagirl, the ever-energetic Mzoe7, the stylish Western Khazinz and MJ Impersonator. The judging panel comprised media personality and model Arthur Evans, radio personality Benkosi “Bkay” Maphosa, modelling guru Mavis Koslek, Tumelo Noko, the last Miss Summer Strides Connie Moyo, former Miss Tourism Zimbabwe Samantha Tshuma, Mr Zimbabwe Ben Chest, Karren Weinand and Thando Phiri. During the show, one could see event organiser, Sipho Mazibuko beaming as the models strutted on the ramp that she was proud of the moment as the pageant she had worked hard for, had finally come back to life. This was because when she was having mental health issues some years ago, she had tried and failed to bring the pageant back. Mazibuko said: “It was a defining moment. The comeback was massive. I didn’t expect that. “The models made me so happy when I saw them on stage. Their performance was immeasurable. They made the competition very tight and I’m so happy that the pageant has returned. It’s definitely going to give other pageants a run for their money.” She appealed to sponsors to come on board and support her initiatives, first being helping St Mary’s Ward at Ingutsheni Central Hospital, where she was admitted nine years ago. Mazibuko used the pageant to push the message of mental health as it has affected many people who are suffering in silence. Themes like bipolar, depression, schizophrenia and low self-esteem were spelt out by the models during presentations. – @bonganinkunzi