The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
A TOTAL of 558 Covid-19 cases have been recorded in schools across the country and Government has intensified efforts to strengthen infection prevention and control strategies at learning institutions ahead of the Christmas and New Year holidays. John Tallach High School in Ntabazinduna, Matabeleland North is one of the schools in the country hardest hit by the global pandemic. Since the first outbreak at the school, 185 pupils have tested positive which prompted Government to turn it into a quarantine centre. Government is also putting in place measures to increase stocks of personal protective equipment, hand sanitisers and drugs to meet the anticipated surge in demand during the festive season. Schools have of late become Covid-19 hotspots as cases continue to increase in the country. According to the Ministry of Health and Child Care, as of December 14, Zimbabwe had recorded 11 358 confirmed cases, 9 554 recoveries and 309 deaths. In a post-Cabinet briefing yesterday, Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa said Government through the relevant ministries continues to strengthen strategies in schools to curb the spread of Covid-19 as schools prepare to break for the Christmas and New Year holidays. “The Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education, in collaboration with Ministry of Health and Child Care continue to strengthen infection prevention and control strategies in schools as they prepare to break for the Christmas and New Year holidays. Cumulatively, 558 cases have been reported at learning institutions across the country,” she said. “Regarding the supply of Personal Protective Equipment, hand sanitisers and drugs, Cabinet advises that measures are being put in place to increase stocks to meet the anticipated surge in demand during the festive season.” Minister Mutsvangwa said given the recent upsurge in confirmed Covid-19 cases, the transport sector has also intensified surveillance to improve compliance with Standard Operating Procedures. She said Government will continue to strengthen risk communication and information, community awareness campaigns while media houses are set to implement innovative information dissemination strategies such as the use of influencers. “Activities will also include intensified dissemination of information to assist returning residents fulfil Covid-19 free certificates entry requirements,” she said. Minister Mutsvangwa revealed that World Health Organisation (WHO) has published new guidelines to assist countries in the management of Covid-19 cases. The guidelines place Zimbabwe in Category CT2, which includes countries experiencing moderate local transmission. “The country is positioned under Level 3. Comparatively, countries with very high incidences of local transmissions are placed under category CT4. For countries in Level 3, like Zimbabwe, WHO recommends that citizens should apply individual precautionary measures such as hand hygiene, cough etiquette, isolating at home if unwell, wearing masks where appropriate, physical social distancing and avoiding the ‘3Cs’ (crowded places, close contact settings and confined/enclosed spaces with poor ventilation),” said Minister Mutsvangwa. “This also include childcare services, primary and secondary schools should remain open, with adequate safety and surveillance measures in place. We should also encourage e-learning at tertiary institutions and evaluate sporting and other social gatherings using risk-based approaches.” Minister Mutsvangwa said Cabinet noted with satisfaction that Zimbabwe is already implementing the WHO recommendations and will continue to strengthen the measures. She urged members of the public to strictly adhere to them. “Noting the need to guarantee convenience to the travelling public, Cabinet reiterates that all travellers coming into the country are required to submit Covid-19-free certificates obtained 48 hours before date of departure and obtained from a WHO-certified laboratory,” said Minister Mutsvangwa. She said travellers who arrive in the country without the requirements will be quarantined. — @mashnets