The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
THE Broadcasting Authority of Zimbabwe (BAZ) has started verifying information and carrying out fact-finding missions in the communities that submitted applications for radio licences that meet their set standards. BAZ intends to license at least 10 community radio stations and 19 campus radio stations for a 10-year period. Communities that have applied are from Hwange and Victoria Falls, Beitbridge, Mbembesi, Manama and Legion, Empandeni, Maphosa, Ndolwane and Plumtree, Binga, Kamativi, Kariba, Mapengolo and Siabuwa and Chikombedzi. Others are from Chiredzi, Rutenga, Mahenye and Malipati, Chipinge, Chimanimani, Gwendingwe, Rusitu, Chibuwe, Shamva and Alaska as well as Rukotso and Susamoyon. Speaking after hearing submissions from two applicants in Beitbridge on Monday, BAZ acting chief executive, Engineer Matthias Chakanyuka, said they had made a request for additional information from the applicants. Those that have applied for licensing are Beitbridge Town council and the Beitbridge-Shashe initiative. Eng Chakanyuka said they were looking at issuing out most of the licences before the end of this month. He said the applications should contain detailed information on the legal, finance, content programming, and technical aspects. “We are here to confirm the information that they have submitted and sought clarifications where there is a need,” said Eng Chakanyuka. “So, the way forward is to go back and look at the information they gave us and we are expecting additional information. It is like a beauty contest where we have two applicants seeking to grab one licence. “We expect the additional information within a week so that we may be able to process the licence. Our aim is to issue all the licences this year.” Eng Chakanyuka said so far they had visited Manicaland, Masvingo and Beitbridge and they will also visit Plumtree, Matobo, Hwange, Binga and Kariba. He said the confirmation of information should be completed by the beginning of next week. Eng Chakanyuka said those that will delay in submitting the outstanding requirements will see their applications being processed in the first quarter of next year.