The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
Political leaders have urged Zimbabweans to set aside their political differences and focus on taking the nation forward as they commemorate Unity Day today. Zanu (PF) and PF-Zapu signed the Unity Accord on December 22, 1987 which ended the political disturbances in Matabeleland region and the Midlands province. In separate interviews, the leaders also urged Zimbabweans to cherish unity saying the country can only develop if there is peace like what it is prevailing now. Zanu-PF Politburo member Cde Tshinga Dube urged citizens to think beyond their differences and focus on taking the nation forward. The Unity Accord, which was signed by former President, the late Cde Robert Mugabe and the late Vice-President Joshua Nkomo, brought together Zanu (PF) and PF-Zapu under the banner of Zanu-PF. Cde Tshinga Dube urged Zimbabweans to be part of a collective dialogue aimed at finding solutions to the country’s challenges. “Unity Day is very important to our nation. Whenever people begin a process there is what we call teething problems so Zimbabwe as a young nation went through the same era of teething problems where people, instead of solving their problems peacefully, they resorted to violence resulting in loss of lives,” he said. Cde Tshinga Dube said focus now should be on rebuilding the country and each and every citizen should play his or her role. He said Cde Mugabe and Dr Nkomo in their wisdom decided to sit down and unite the nation by signing the Unity Accord, which brought an end to the post-Independence conflict. “Our leaders Cdes Robert Mugabe and Joshua Mqabuko Nkomo in their wisdom and from their own experiences sat down and resolved to end the disturbances and unite the people,” he said. Cde Tshinga Dube said it was not true that PF-Zapu was swallowed by Zanu (PF) when the Unity Accord was signed on December 22, 1987 as some people wanted to believe. Cde Tshinga Dube said Zimbabweans must reflect on the ethos of those who drew up the agreement and respect them. He however, expressed concern that young people seem not to appreciate the importance of Unity Day. “Our youths should be educated on the importance of Unity Day,” said Cde Tshinga Dube. Bulawayo Provincial Affairs Minister Judith Ncube urged Zimbabweans to cherish Unity Day saying it was a reflection of maturity on the part of the country’s leaders. “Unity Day is a very important day to our people who know our history. The signing of the Unity Accord brought peace and stability, which translated into economic development for our country,” she said. “We sat down as Zimbabweans and amicably solved our problems and this is what we should continue to cherish as a nation.” Bulawayo provincial war veterans’ leader Cde Cephas Ncube said the Unity Accord is an example of a home-grown solution to a problem facing a nation. “Unity Day is a very important day, which should be celebrated by every Zimbabwean as it has brought peace and unity among our people. It is a reflection of home-grown solutions to our challenges and it means as Zimbabweans we are capable of solving our own problems without foreign interference,” he said. — @mashnets