The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
VICTORIA Falls Hotel has re-opened its flagship Jungle Junction Restaurant and slashed by half service charges as it shifts focus towards the domestic market. Victoria Falls Hotel’s clientele was traditionally 95 percent international before lockdown. The unprecedented closure of the industry due to Covid-19 induced lockdown led to a paradigm shift in terms of clientele focus as international tourists are mostly restricted from travelling. Victoria Falls Hotel runs four upmarket restaurants that include the Jungle Junction, Livingstone, the Terrace and the Pool Side restaurant. Jungle Junction Restaurant officially re-opened last Friday with a buffet dinner for invited guests and partners mostly made up of locals as it transforms its dishes to meet the local taste. Deputy general manager, Mr Temba Maripakwenda, assured clients of their safety saying all basic Covid-19 protocols have been put in place. The facility had remained closed since March. The company hopes to ride on the festive season activity to reset its presence on business. Mr Maripakwenda said the 2020 festive period was a different one as there are no international arrivals hence the focus on local travellers. He said the hotel has slashed accommodation and meals rates by more than half to cater for the domestic market in line with country’s drive to promote domestic tourism. “Our guests are happy so far because of our competitive rates. We are a five-star hotel and you can’t find such discounts anywhere. “We have all basic Covid-19 protocols in place and our staff has been trained hence guests are assured of their safety and protection,” said the deputy general manager. The hotel’s executive chef, Mr Paul Muranda, said they had adjusted meals to tap into the local market. About 95 percent of our clients was international and now we have adjusted our dishes to meet local taste. This year has been difficult and demand for our industry has been low hence we have to adjust the service to be all encompassing,” he said. — @ncubeleon