The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
HE has been in the game for over five years now and wherever he has performed, he proudly declares “ngiliJahunda elihle” bragging about his Gwanda town. The name Zhezhingtonz rings a bell to as many music followers, in particular those that appreciate underground music from the Matabeleland region. From sharing the stage with the likes of Rebecca Malope at the Gwanda Gospel Music Festival to rubbing shoulders with Professor at Umcimbi Wabantu in Bulawayo, Zhezhingtonz a kwaito/house musician has become a regular at festivals. His stage name is nothing but fascinating, fun and attractive, something he feels has lured many people towards his craft. Oozing so much confidence, the charismatic musician who is riding high with his track Ndiwe that features Master Zhoe, has also performed at the Intwasa Arts Festival, Bulawayo Arts Festival and Switch On in Victoria Falls. Given his regular appearance at shows in Bulawayo, many have been of the opinion that he is from the city. This past weekend, the artiste made history after he became one of the first artistes from the Gwanda mining town to clinch a Roil Bulawayo Arts Awards (RoilBAA) gong. As he accepted the Outstanding Kwaito/House Artist award clad in an outfit designed by Welsh The Stylist, Zhezhingtonz who never shies away from the camera, made his statement when he vowed that he was in the arts industry to stay. In an interview this week, he said he was overjoyed by winning the award. “It’s a dream come true. No amount of words can describe the joy and feeling of fulfilment I have.” He thanked his team — Tatenda Nyoni, Admire Ndlovu, Dumolwenkosi Dube and Zifungo as well as DJ Drumz and Lance Hebron for supporting his music career. His RoiBAA win is in addition to more awards including the 2017 National Traffic Safety award for best composition on safety oriented song, 2017 Thankful bird’s People of Action award and 2019 Tesma Award Best gospel song. Born Fredrick Moyo on January 27 in 1992, Zhezhingtonz is nothing but a down to earth musician. His music is inspired by South African star Dr Malinga with his pillar of strength being his mother Zibusiso Dube and siblings Stanley, Sifundo, Thulani, Brian and Bridget. Quizzed how he spends his free time, he said he plays soccer and hangs out with friends. However, just like other artistes, Zhezhingtonz said the Covid-19-induced lockdown brought with it a lot of challenges, but for him, it was more of a time of reflection. “It was tough, but the passion for music spurred me on. My team also managed to steer me into having collaborations, shows and even shooting music videos.” The highlight of his music career, Zhezhingtonz said has been performing across the country and proudly representing his home town. “It’s always an awesome feeling when I perform at national shows because I’ll be representing my hometown. This also shows me that I’m on the right track as a Gwanda artiste who’s been given a slot at big events,” said Zhezhingtonz. If one has not heard of his music, a simple click on his various digital and social media platforms works wonders. “Fans and would-be followers of my music can have a musical healing in the latest two albums, Out Come and Six Waves among a host of singles,” he said. If these are not enough, Zhezhingtonz said music listeners will have to await for a banger that he is working with Amalobolo hit-makers — Ngoma Ingoma who walked away with the RoilBAA Outstanding Song of the Year gong. – @mthabisi_mthire.