The Chronicle MANCHESTER CITY’S game at Everton on Monday night has been postponed after more players at the Etihad tested positive for Covid-19. City duo Gabriel Jesus and Kyle Walker were told on Christmas Eve afternoon that they had tested positive for the coronavirus — along with two members of staff. And it is believed at least five more cases have now been confirmed at the Etihad after the latest round of testing on Sunday. That meant that the club were forced to pull the plug on their trip to Goodison Park on Monday night. City — who sit sixth — even had the chance to briefly go top of the league, but would have needed to win by 11 GOALS. Their CFA training headquarters will close with immediate effect in a bid to try to contain the spread — but Sunday’s trip to Chelsea must also now be in doubt. A statement from City read: “Manchester City FC can confirm that this evening’s Premier League fixture at Everton has been postponed. After the latest round of Covid-19 testing, the club returned a number of positive cases, in addition to the four already reported on Christmas Day. “With the security of the bubble compromised, there posed a risk that the virus could spread further among the squad, the staff and potentially beyond. “Based on strong medical advice the Premier League, in consultation with both clubs, have decided to postpone the fixture. “All positive cases involving players and staff will observe a period of self-isolation in accordance with Premier League and UK Government protocol on quarantine. “The first team training ground at City Football Academy will close for an indeterminate period, with the squad and associated bubble undergoing testing before any decision is made for training to resume. “Everyone at the Club wishes all of our colleagues a speedy recovery ahead of their return to work, training and competition.” City’s Covid-19 outbreak could spell fixture chaos with their Carabao Cup semi-final against United and trip to Chelsea major doubts. They are due to face Chelsea on January 3 with United coming just three days later — and with a currently tight schedule there are few gaps for rearrangements. – The Sun