The Chronicle It is that time of the year when many people travel to different destinations to enjoy the Christmas and New Year holidays. Many workers including those working in neighbouring countries like South Africa and Botswana join their families and relatives during this time of the year. Most local companies closed yesterday to allow workers time to travel to their different destinations for the holidays. It is during such public holidays that the country records an increase in road traffic accidents hence the need for the police to mount roadblocks on our highways. The Zimbabwe Traffic Safety Council of Zimbabwe (TSCZ) and the police usually conduct joint safety campaigns ahead of such holidays. Last year the First lady Auxillia Mnangagwa joined the campaign. The first Lady, who is also the patron of the National Transport and Drivers Association (NTDA) spent the day interacting with drivers and other travellers at tollgates where she explained the importance of driving safely. More than 130 people were killed in road traffic accident during the festive season last year. Statistics have shown that more than 80 percent of the road traffic accidents are as a result of human error which means they can be avoided. Most of the accidents are as a result of recklessness, drunken driving and fatigue. We therefore continue to urge passengers to assist the police by discouraging drivers from drinking and driving, overloading as well as speeding. The passengers should not hesitate to report defiant drivers at the next roadblock or nearest police station. A motorist should plan his or her journey well so that there is adequate time to travel to a given destination to avoid speeding. People using public transport should not board overloaded buses while bus operators should avoid overworking drivers as some of the accidents witnessed during public holidays are as a result of fatigue. Police on their part should ensure only roadworthy vehicles are on the country’s roads and those that decide to drink and drive should be locked up until they are sober to continue with their journey. There is urgent need for all road users to exercise extreme caution to avoid accidents especially now that it is raining and most roads are slippery. It is a fact that there is a lot of excitement among motorists and their passengers as they travel to their different destinations hence the increase in accidents. We want to once again appeal to motorists entrusted with their passengers’ lives to strive to reach their respective destinations safely and thereafter celebrate. 