The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief The Government has issued licences in all categories of broadcasting to diversify information dissemination and foster development in all spheres of society. To demonstrate it’s commitment, Government has been opening up all categories of licences including free to air, commercial and also community radio stations. Media bodies such as Misa Zimbabwe and Zacrass have commended the Government which has through the Broadcasting Authority of Zimbabwe (BAZ), issued licences to the first three community radio stations in post-Independence Zimbabwe. In a statement published on the BAZ Twitter and Facebook pages on 17 December 2020, the Authority announced the granting of community radio licenses to The Mbembesi Development Trust, Ntepe-Manama Community Radio Trust and Nyangani Community Radio Trust. BAZ also announced Campus Radio Broadcasting Service licences to the Midlands State University and the University of Zimbabwe. In an interview in Gweru yesterday, the Director of Media Services in the Ministry of Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Dr Anywhere Mutambudzi said opening up of the airwaves was an abler for development. “It is the desire of the Second Republic to open up airwaves, an enabler that facilitates free flow of information for the development of the country. Dr Mutambudzi said Government aims to also target communities that are marginalised in the mainstream media as a temporary measure. “If you check on Zimbabwe Association of Community Radio Stations (Zacras) and Misa statements, these (licensed stations) are stations supported by Media associations that have a desire to see diversity in the media industry. “So the fact that they are also coming up acknowledging and indicating that they are happy and satisfied is a clear demonstration that Government is willing to issue the licences to anyone who aspires to broadcast in the country, “ he said. In a statement yesterday, Zacras welcomed the historic step taken by BAZ to license the first three community radio stations in post-Independence Zimbabwe. Zacras has been at the forefront of advocating for the licensing of community radios to give a voice to marginalised communities. “Zacras therefore takes this opportunity to commend the Second Republic for taking visible steps in seeking to put to life the provisions of the Constitution of Zimbabwe which talk about access to information and freedom of expression. “This latest development also comes against the background of the licensing of the first campus radio, the Great Zimbabwe Campus Radio,” read the statement from Zacras. Zacras said it will continue to entreat the Government of Zimbabwe, through BAZ, to ensure that the broadcasting space is diversified in its entirety through the licensing of people centred and community rooted community radios. “Furthermore, we urge the Government of Zimbabwe to ensure that the new licensees get all the technical and start up support that is needed to get the stations off the ground,” read the statement. “Licensing of community radio stations is a step in the right direction.” Misa Zimbabwe also welcomed the licensing of the country’s first three community radio stations as a step in the right direction towards opening up the broadcasting sector to new players. Misa said the three-tier system comprises public, commercial and community broadcasting , that Misa Zimbabwe, together with Zacras has incessantly been advocating for over the years in conformity with regional and international instruments that Zimbabwe is part to. “Misa Zimbabwe urges the newly licensed community radio stations to jealously guard and protect their editorial independence. In that regard, their editorial policies should be defined and underpinned in pursuit of an inclusive social development agenda,” reads Misa Zimbabwe statement.. Misa Zimbabwe said the programming should thus be, for-by-and about the community as envisaged in terms of the African Charter on Broadcasting.