The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Chronicle Reporter
THREE people were murdered in Matabeleland South province during the Christmas period, police have confirmed. The first case occurred in Tjehanga Village in Bulilima District under Chief Masendu. Matabeleland South Police spokesperson Inspector Loveness Mangena confirmed the cases. “In the first case the suspect, Putshu Moyo alias Mabutho/Kuzvinetsa whose age could not be obtained fatally stabbed Lizwe Mguni (26). The two who are neighbours had a dispute on the 18th of December while drinking beer at a local shop at about 10pm. The dispute resulted in a fight between the two and they were restrained on three occasions. At about 11pm the accused went out of the bottle store and came back armed with an unidentified sharp object,” she said. Insp Mangena said the accused stabbed the deceased on the lower abdomen, right thigh and on left eye. She said after committing the offence the accused fled the scene leaving the deceased lying in a pool of blood and is still at large. Inspector Mangena said the second murder case was also in Bulilima district and was committed at around 7pm on Christmas Day in Bambadzi area under Chief Madlambuzi. “Finios Mlalazi (42) struck the deceased Nkululeko Makhaba (48) with a log on the head and he died on the spot. The two were earlier at Bambadzi Business Centre and had a dispute over an undisclosed issue. The now deceased left the shops going to his homestead but Nkululeko followed and attacked him,” said Insp Mangena. She said Makhaba ran and jumped the fence into a nearby homestead calling for help but Mlalazi pursued him, picked a log and struck him twice on the head. Insp Mangena said Makhaba had two deep cuts on the head and several bruises on the body. She said members of the public apprehended Mlalazi who is now in police custody. Insp Mangena said the third murder happened in Bhazha area of Matobo District on 23 December when a man axed his wife to death. “Sidingulwazi Hlabangani (26) of Tungwane B Village under chief Masuku was sleeping with the now deceased Sinini Maphosa (21) when a dispute over an unknown issue ensued. The two were living as a couple at the accused’s homestead. The accused struck the deceased once on the head with an axe. She managed to run away for a few metres but fell down and died on the spot. A neighbour who was awaken by her cry for help found her in a pool of blood on the ground and saw the accused who is still at large holding an axe before he vanished into the darkness,” she said. Inspector Mangena said police are worried that people no longer respect the sanctity of life hence the increasing murder cases.