The Chronicle Nelias Shiri, Chronicle Reporter
POLICE have arrested a couple which was part of six suspects that raided Cranemore Shops in Umguza district on the outskirts of Bulawayo armed with axes. Nhlanhla Ndlovu (age not given) and his girlfriend Shylet Sai (21) were arrested at their hideout in Binga following the robbery which occurred on December 19. The suspects are said to have attacked a shopkeeper and her husband before getting away with cash, groceries and cellphones, whose total value was not revealed yesterday. The groceries included tins of beef, diapers, floor polish, mineral water, beer and flour among other items. Bulawayo police spokesperson Inspector Abednico Ncube confirmed the robbery and arrest of the two suspects saying the couple’s accomplices are still on the run. He said after raiding the shop, the suspects were intercepted by police while driving towards Bulawayo. Insp Ncube said the suspects abandoned their getaway kombi which the cops used to track down Ndlovu. “The suspects gained entry into the shop through a window. They then proceeded to the complainant’s room and demanded money and cellphones. To induce fear, one of the suspects struck the complainant and her husband with an axe leaving the two injured,” said Insp Ncube. He said the suspects then took cash, groceries, cellphones and some electrical gadgets. They loaded the groceries in their gateaway kombi and drove towards Bulawayo-Vic Falls Tollgate.” He said police officers deployed at Matabeleland North Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Richard Moyo’s residence managed to intercept the suspects, who abandoned the vehicle and fled. He said the shopkeeper and her husband were rushed to Mpilo Central Hospital for treatment. Insp Ncube commended the public for community policing initiatives that contributed to the arrest of the two suspects. He appealed to members of the public who might have information that could lead to the arrest of other suspects to contact any nearest police station.