The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
ORGANISERS of the ongoing 2020 Intwasa Arts Festival koBulawayo which is largely being held virtually have said they are having challenges monetising the performances. The five-day fete that is running under the theme: “The New Normal” roared into life on Sunday. Since the advent of Covid-19, live shows have been on halt and this has seen a surge in virtual shows as artistes fight to remain relevant. Intwasa director, Raisedon Baya said they are attracting fair numbers for their virtual events, but they are having difficulties with monetising the shows. Because of the failure to cash in, it has been a big blow to artistes as they are not getting much financially. “Virtually, we’re doing better than we expected as we’re getting above 1 000 views per show. It’s great. However, the downside is how to monetise the virtual performances because at the end of the day, artistes must be paid,” said Baya. Recently, a pay per view (PPV) application which works in a way that an audience pays in advance to watch a show online from the comfort of their homes was introduced with hope that platforms like Intwasa would use it for their next edition. A new initiative, a Twitter Party kicked-started the event on Sunday. It was hosted by Pat Phiri and Chipo Mawarire at Sabela Studios. Djembe Monks left the crowd in awe through their drum set if the comments section was anything to go by. Tonight, the play Sons of Men will premiere at Bulawayo Theatre as from 5pm. The play is a story about men that gives a sad and insightful look at men without work, men in prison, men in and out of relationships, men with cars, men and soccer. The star-studded play that features multi-award winning Charmaine “Venda Princess” Mudau was written by Christopher Mlalazi, Butshilo Nleya, Philani A Nyoni, Thabani Moyo, Memory Kumbota and Baya. The ever-popular Women Wine and Words will make a return to the festival tomorrow. It will be held at the National Gallery in Bulawayo. The event which is a mix of poetry, music and wine, will have the likes of Mimie Tarukwana, Vuyo Brown, Mandie Mae, Luchi Shiki, Umind and Delah. On the same day at the Bulawayo Theatre, the play Vagina Monologues Africa will be staged. The play which is an adaptation of Eve Ensler’s 1996 production deals with women’s issues. Directed by Memory Kumbota and produced by Chipo Mawarire, it features Musawenkosi Sibanda, Agnes Ncube, Sithabile Ndubiwa, Charmaine Mudau and Lady Tshawe. Those who love spoken word will be treated to And Now The Poets Speak on December 24 at an event that will take place at the National Gallery. It will feature eight poets, Desire Moyoxide, Sithandazile Dube, Godswill Muzarabani, Thandoe, Sister X, Sons of Ntu, Michelle Tanya and Sinkende Mashayangombane.