The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Contemporary artiste, Nkwali (real name Nomathamsanqa Mkwananzi) is readying to release her second album, Themba, which she has dedicated to her late father for being her first love and supporter of her arts career. Nkwali’s father, Charles Themba Mkwananzi died in 2018 after suffering a stroke when she was away in Austria. She was affected by his death and following a healing process, she finally gathered courage to go into studio and pour her heart out on this album that has eight tracks. Featured on the album are Gaz’elimnyama and Madlela Skhobokhobo. The tracks are eMkhwananzi, Khuzani, Uyimbokodo, Sthandwa Sami, Ngoma Yami, Amasiko, Mntanami and Dlozi lolaka. This album will be her second after Sithokozile (2015). It will be released on December 17 on various digital platforms. Unlike her previous album which was purely acapella, the forthcoming one fuses Afro jazz and Afro pop with instruments ranging from mbira and drums merged with the guitar and piano. “The album Themba is dedicated to my late father Charles Themba Mkwananzi,” she said. “With the album, I thank my dad for the love and support he showed us as a parent. He brought us up, managed to take us to school in difficult conditions and showed us what love is. “We’re a united family and this is all thanks to the man. Like most girls, he was my first love and he supported me in my career.” Reflecting on the early days of her career, Nkwali, a former Iyasa member said she would spend hours on end telling her father about her shows overseas. “I remember I started singing at an early age and my dad always urged me to believe in myself. He was the first point of call whenever I returned from any events locally or overseas. He would be interested in knowing how the shows went and I’d have to sit down with him for hours and narrate my experiences to him” said Nkwali. She said she is saddened that her father will not be able to listen to the album that she dedicated to him. “It’s unfortunate that my dad didn’t live to see me record this tribute to him. He died while I was overseas and I had to travel back for his funeral. It really broke my heart. This album embodies the love and affection I had for him in song,” said Nkwali. Getting inspiration for the album, the musician said was not hard. “This album was inspired by the man who was my father,” she said. “After having the inspiration, everything else fell into place and it was easy for me to create the music. “As a singer and composer, inspiration comes to you at any time and anywhere so one must be prepared to always create.” She did all the vocals on the album and on the song Amasiko, she collaborated with Madlela and Gaz’elimnyama. “The lyrics were written by my brother Madlela and Gaz’elimnyama and Dlodloba did the backing vocals. Working with these artistes was an honour in itself and I admire the dedication that they have towards their craft. I hope we work together again in the near future,” Nkwali said. For the production of the album, she said she worked with 10th District Records. Dumisani Ramadu Moyo was responsible for the production. Guitarists Pascal Lopongo and Mthabisi Moyo were also roped in. The talented musician said she hopes to record videos for two songs, Amasiko and Sthandwa Sami. Already, Nkwali has given fans a glimpse of one her songs, Uyimbokodo which denounces gender-based violence. “I want to give Uyimbokodo a chance to serenade my followers because it has a very important message. The song is about gender-based violence and it encourages women to come out of abusive relationships. “The ‘ngihlalel’abantwana’ mentality should stop in the 21st century. No woman should go through abuse for the sake of guaranteeing a roof over her children’s heads, they should leave abusive environments,” said Nkwali. “In the song, I am simply saying ‘omama bazimbokodo’, they are the rock of our society, they define what a society is therefore they should stand up against any form of abuse; no woman or child deserves to be abused.” – @bonganinkunzi