The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
IN hip-hop culture, hustling is the best way one can make money outside music and it is this spirit that gave birth to Kingsville Clothing, a brand based in Bulawayo that recently scooped the Pogues Zim hip-hop Best Brand Supporting Local award. Kingsville Clothing was founded by Bulawayo hip-hop legend Oscar “Orthodox Six” Utete in 2012.
The clothing label which specialises in a variety of clothing items including caps, t-shirts and masks has over the years, dressed the likes of the late Zim hip-hop King Cal Vin, Asaph, Lord Skeelz, Prozac, producer King Krued, MC Tytoh, Bovas, PD The Ghost & Lady K (ZiFM Stereo), POY, Donna N, Tehn Diamond, Take Five, DJ Liz and Zim Hip-Hop awards founder Aldrian “Beefy” Harrison among many others. Orthodox Six, a former Milton High and Cyrene High School pupil, started rapping in the 90s and realised at an early stage that he needed to be an entrepreneur in order to make it. This is how the clothing label was born. “The birth of the clothing label was influenced by the Hip-Hop Hustle mentality because I figured there’s more money to be made out there compared to just sticking to rap which hardly pays considering the economy and other disadvantaging factors,” said Orthodox Six. Over the years, Orthodox Six said he realised that hard work and overcoming obstacles was the only way for one to be great at what they do. “I’ve always found that anything worth achieving will always have obstacles in the way so you have to have the drive and determination to overcome those obstacles in your quest to achieve whatever it is that you want to accomplish. “Never give up, never lose hope and always have faith, it allows you to cope. Hard times will pass as they always do,” said Orthodox Six. He said the Pogues Zim Hip-Hop Award has spurred them to promote more artistes despite the difficult economic environment. The brand was visible at Cal Vin’s funeral where many people were dressed in Cal Vin customised t-shirts and caps. “The brand has managed to grow and stay afloat despite the Covid-19 challenges and the general economic difficulties and we want to thank our very loyal and supportive customers. The brand also managed to scoop an award at this year’s Pogues Zim Hip-Hop Awards for Best Brand Supporting Local. “Next year, we’re aiming at expanding the store, promoting more artistes and just providing the best quality clothing for our consumers,” said Orthodox Six who holds a Degree in Psychology. The artiste said with his brand, he wants to provide youths with something to wear, that is uniquely from Bulawayo. “Our aim as Kingsville Clothing is to uplift the youth and promote artistes by way of endorsements, selling artistes products and merchandise, offering the stores premises for interviews and video shoots without charging a fee or seeking any commission,” said Orthodox Six. – @bonganinkunzi