The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
ORGANISERS of the annual Mapopoma Festival in Victoria Falls are going ahead with the event that is slated for December 30 and 31. In compliance with Covid-19 regulations, the third edition which will be headlined by locals Enzo Ishall, Nutty O and Takura will be held indoors at The Kingdom at Victoria Falls as a way of limiting numbers. With this year’s Victoria Falls Carnival being scrapped due to the pandemic, fun lovers hoping to end their year in style in the resort city are only left with the Mapopoma Festival. Event organiser, Patrick Musonza popularly known as DJ Spevah, said the two-day event which has been cleared by ZRP and the Ministry of Health and Child Care will be held at The Great Enclosure (at The Kingdom Hotel). He said despite the indoor set-up, the event will maintain its traditional approach. Africa is the future and Ubuntu Concerts will be staged over the two days with patrons being encouraged to bring flags from their countries. “The festival will be held in a theatre style indoors to allow for fumigation, easy screening and sanitation as well as to control people as part of Covid-19 regulations. We’re still working on numbers to make sure we stick to Covid-19 regulations,” said DJ Spevah. “There’ll be a separate backstage media area, VIP arena and three separate bars to allow social distancing.” More entertainment at the event will be provided by DJ Spevah, Fatso, Cleazer, Skuzi, Links, Maraza, Conz, Dollar, Mafero Mafero, Afrikas Movement and Wallace. Gweru -based reigning Mr Zimbabwe Devson Takudzva Luzaine is expected to grace the event as a special guest. Musonza said all artistes will be tested within 72 hours of the show and advance tickets started selling yesterday. Demand is high and we expect them to run out by Wednesday or end of the week.” The pandemic, DJ Spevah said, had greatly affected business in Victoria Falls as many people, especially international tourists, are still sceptical about travelling while some are still being restricted. “It’s unfortunate that Covid-19 has affected the country and city in general. Everybody knows that the end of year events are usually fully booked. “For this year, the local authority and general businesses are going to lose a lot of revenue,” he said. – @ncubeleon.