The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
THE International Rescue Committee (IRC) is supporting 15 000 households in Matabeleland region and Manicaland province. In a statement yesterday, IRC Country Director, Mr Zvidzai Maburutse said the beneficiaries who were getting multi-purpose cash transfers, were affected by climate change and the Covid-19 pandemic. He said some of the beneficiaries were receiving smart agriculture inputs including drought-resistant crops and drip irrigation equipment to mitigate hunger and build resilience. Mr Maburutse said 10 222 households in Chimanimani and Chipinge were benefitting from feeding programmes while 4 380 farmers from 34 operational wards in Beitbridge and Nyanga were being supported with smart agriculture inputs. “The IRC is also working to safeguard communities from the Covid-19 pandemic by raising awareness on its risk factors, providing personal protective equipment, infection protection and control materials as well as building and installing water points to help people practice preventative methods. Women and children are the most vulnerable in times of disaster hence the IRC continues to offer psychosocial support and essential gender-based violence case management services through Safe Spaces in Manicaland,” he said. Mr Maburutse said climate change which is manifesting through frequent shifting weather patterns was affecting the ability of people to feed themselves. He said the Covid-19 pandemic had also affected general sources of livelihoods for many people. The organisation, Mr Maburutse said, was also looking at long term solutions to improve the people’s welfare. “We want to support communities to recover livelihoods through seeds that can withstand drought; water-saving technology like drip kits and training of farmers on climate-proofing,” said Mr Maburutse. According to a World Food Programme report, Zimbabwe was named among the world’s top 16 global hunger hotspots. Mr Maburutse said in recent years, drought and crop failure exacerbated by macro-economic challenges had created a humanitarian crisis for moe than seven million people in the country, with many people unable to meet their daily food needs. “The Cyclone Idai we experienced last year, coupled with the Covid-19 pandemic has compounded the situation as families have been unable to obtain income or access food due to movement restrictions. -@tupeyo