The Chronicle This year has been tough because of the Covid-19 pandemic which has affected the health and livelihoods of hundreds of thousands in the country Some have lost jobs while others, lucky to retain them, have had to take substantial salary cuts. This has dented their living standards. Emotional stress often follows when that happens. A number of us have actually tested positive to the coronavirus, with more than 300 losing their lives. The economy has been hit hard. The national lockdown imposed in March meant that the economy was, to some extent, under lockdown. Travel restrictions, the need for social distancing and other curbs to life and business as we know them had an obvious adverse impact on the economy and people’s wellbeing. Indeed, 2020 has been marred by Covid-19. We, thus, mark Christmas Day the day after tomorrow under the shadow of the worst disease outbreak humanity has seen in 102 years. Christmas parties, the huge gatherings we have been accustomed to, heavy spending and all the conviviality that have traditionally come with this moment have been curtailed this year because of the infection that had affected 12 422 people, killing 322 by Monday countrywide. It is concerning that the festive season comes as we appear to be entering the second phase of Covid-19 infections after the lull between July and October. It is a Christmas Day like no other with vastly curbed spending and freedoms. We have no choice. We just have to celebrate the birth of Christ while observing the Covid-19 protocols we have been observing since March and avoid getting carried away by the yearning for the old normal. Our people must avoid the crowds. Those who will organise events to celebrate Christmas Day must keep the numbers low, and those low numbers must keep that social distance. The people must wear the face mask correctly too. They must wash their hands with soapy water thoroughly and frequently. Any who might feel unwell, we advise that they seek medical treatment as early as possible. That medical treatment may include them taking a Covid-19 test. It is a tradition in our country as elsewhere across the globe for people to travel to celebrate Christmas Day with friends and relatives. However, in the interests of the lockdown, it will be wise for us to avoid travelling. As we have always advised, the festive season, yes, is a time to be merry, but in doing so, it is vital for us to note that the New Year with all its obligations is only seven days away. School fees will have to be paid. Children will need uniforms and so on. Consumer Council of Zimbabwe southern region manager Mr Comfort Muchekeza warns elsewhere in these pages today: “Our message to consumers is that Christmas is just a day, same applies to New Year. Our celebration should be more confined to celebrating life and that the Lord has allowed us to see the next season. In terms of spending, we must know that what we have been eating and wearing daily remains our focus. We should just know that there is life after Christmas and New Year’s celebrations,” he said. Therefore, as we mark Christmas Day and, seven days later, New Year’s Day let us remember that Covid-19 is still with us and that the old obligations for the beginning of the year are waiting.