The Chronicle Judith Phiri recently in Tsholotsho
THE Minister of State for Provincial Affairs and Devolution in Matabeleland North Province, Richard Moyo, has called on farmers to embrace climate smart technologies to enhance food security in the country. Speaking during the Zimbabwe Agricultural Society (ZAS) prize giving ceremony for the best extension officer at Bambangamandla Village in Tsholotsho on Monday, Minister Moyo said smart technologies were critical in boosting yields. He congratulated Mr Elisha Bepete for scooping the best extension officer at the 2019 Zimbabwe Agricultural Show. Mr Bepete was honoured for supervising the overall winning farmer in the province who won a tractor at the 2018 Agricultural Show. He also got the greatest number of farmers under the Pfumvudza/Intwasa programme in the entire province. For his efforts, he was given a brand new motorbike and a shield of honour. “Farmers more than ever should learn about climate smart technologies as climate change is clearly the new reality. In line with the thrust of smart agriculture under Vision 2030, Zimbabwe wants to create self-sufficiency and food surplus economy,” he said. “Recognising and awarding excelling extension officers (mudhumeni/umlimisi) is key in the development of agriculture. The role of an extension officer is invaluable as these officers intermediate between researchers and farmers. “The officers impart knowledge to farmers, identify technical deficiencies through participatory surveys and attend to farmers’ queries relating to crops and livestock as a way of increasing agricultural productivity and foresting food security.” Minister Moyo also commended the Government for providing motorbikes to enhance the work of extension officers. He urged farmers to take advantage of the platform provided by organisations such as ZAS, the Bulawayo Agricultural Society (BAS) and other provincial agriculture show societies. ZAS chairman Mr Ivan Craig advised farmers to take part in the agricultural competitions saying these offer more benefits. “Don’t be afraid to attend the agricultural shows. As farmers there is a lot that you can gain like creating friends with other farmers, exchanging seeds for different and various crops, learn new things, various companies will also be present to impart knowledge to you,” said Mr Craig. ZAS acting chief executive officer, Engineer Enkelbert Makure, said despite Covid-19, this year’s Agricultural Show in Harare was successful as farmers and the private sector displayed their ability to adapt to the new normal. “This has been a very difficult year due to Covid-19. Farmers failed to have their ward, district, zone and provincial shows. Even the Zimbabwe International Trade Fair was cancelled,” he said. Matabeleland North provincial crop and livestock production officer, Mr Dumisani Nyoni, said the first competition for farmers was to go into the field and plant their crops. He encouraged Farmers to take the Pfumvudza/Intwasa programme seriously as Government was assisting them with seed and fertiliser. “Let’s work hard in the fields and for our livestock together with the extension officers. The Government will also be assisting farmers with tick grease for their livestock,” he said. Agriseeds Zimbabwe managing director, Mr Simon Nyanhete, emphasised the importance of farmers working together with seed producers. He challenged the winning extensive officer, Mr Bepete, to provide them with two young farmers (male and female) under the age of 30 who will be given 10kg maize seeds and 5kg sorghum seeds each as a way of motivating young farmers. ZAS has been in existence for 125 years and is the oldest convener and host of agricultural, commercial and industrial shows in Zimbabwe. Its strategy seeks to promote agriculture and its supporting activities as well as to facilitate agricultural development in Zimbabwe.