The Chronicle Business Reporter
A DRAFT Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) report for the 2 400MW Batoka Gorge Hydro-Electric Scheme project is undergoing disclosure to various interested stakeholders for input ahead of the investment’s imminent implementation. The Zambezi River Authority (ZRA) is finalising preparatory activities for the implementation of the Batoka Gorge Hydro-Electric Scheme (BGHES) in the first quarter of 2021. About 4 000 direct plus 6 000 indirect jobs are set to be created during the construction phase. It is also envisaged that the project will also improve access to electricity among the host communities. This will add to the electricity generation capacity of the two neighbouring countries for driving their respective socio-economic development programmes. A broad range of specialist studies have been undertaken to ensure sustainable implementation of the multi-billion-dollar project to be situated at 47km downstream of Victoria Falls. These include the updating of the 1993 Engineering Feasibility Studies (EFS), which has since been completed, the preparation of the ESIA report and the associated Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP). “A draft ESIA report has since been developed and is undergoing disclosure to interested and affected stakeholders as well as the general public for them to provide comments and concerns regarding the planned development of the scheme,” said ZRA in a latest update. The bi-national authority said the disclosure process was a statutory requirement in the two countries, administered by their respective environmental regulatory agencies, namely, the Environmental Management Agency and the Zambia Environmental Management Agency. This is also critical in accessing financing for project implementation. The first phase of the disclosure exercise for the draft ESIA report was concluded early this month. In line with the Covid-19 pandemic health guidelines instituted by the health authorities in the two countries, a larger part of the public disclosure was carried out using virtual meetings, which were complemented by a limited level of physical meetings. These are being complemented by radio broadcasts for wide range of interested and affected groups this month. In its draft ESIA report, ZRA said the presentations highlighted the identified potential impacts as well as the associated mitigation measures for negative impacts and enhancement measures for positive impacts.- @okazunga