The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
BEING at home with family seems to be the main thing that local artistes will be doing today as they are not able to hold shows. This year’s Christmas Day is different as the world is under the Covid-19 pandemic, something that has changed how people celebrate the holiday. Artistes who are normally busy at this time of the year have found themselves out of work for most of the year. Lucky ones have been getting gigs at weddings and the like, but not at the frequency they have become used to. Rhumba musician Madlela Skhobokhobo said he will be spending the day with his family although he would have loved to go to the rural areas. “This year I’ll be at home with my family. For me, this is the time for family as it’ll be a double celebration of Christmas and my first anniversary. Usually we go to the rural areas in Gwanda and meet with the family at my grandmother’s house. But because of this Covid thing, we aren’t going there,” said Madlela Skhobokhobo. Local rapper, Fish M McSwagg said he will also spend time with family and go to studio. “I’ll be spending time at home with the family but I’ll also be at work as there are some projects that I need to complete by January,” said Fish M McSwagg. Veteran modelling instructor, Sipho Mazibuko said she will be working as she will be busy hosting weddings at her Lavinia Gardens venue. On New Year’s Day, she said she is intending to visit Ingutsheni Central Hospital with her models and treat the patients to a lunch. Tribal house trio Djembe Monks said they would be spending Christmas with their respective families. “We aren’t working on Christmas Day as we’ll be spending the day with our families. However, after that, we have some small gigs lined up around the city as part of the festive season,” said Djembe Monks spokesperson Emmanuel Nkomo. Radio personality and M.C, Cde Phil said he would split the day between family and work. “In the morning, I’ll be with family. However, later on in the day, I’ll have to leave for a family fun day in the city where I’m the M.C. You can’t rest these days,” said Cde Phil. Afro Jazz songstress Qeqeshiwe Mntambo said she will be at home, cooking her favourite meal. “I’ll be making a meal that I’ve been craving for the whole year. I want to make the most of it because in the evening, I’ll be performing at a local bar,” said Qeqe.