The Chronicle Prosper Ndlovu, Business Editor
THE NetOne National Expansion Project Phase III is set to start early next year at a cost of US$71 million as the Government steps up efforts to deploy broadband infrastructure and investments to unlock more economic opportunities and facilitate improved access to digital technology services. The project is expected to upgrade operator’s national network coverage from about 75 to 85 percent, improve LTE (4G) coverage and introduce 5G technology to cater for increased data demand. Building a vibrant digital economy is a vital component towards realising an upper middle-income economy by 2030. As the Government moves to implement the National Development Strategy (NDS1:2021-2025), ensuring increased connectivity by industry players is critical in ensuring affordable, accessible, ubiquitous and reliable Information Communication Technology (ICT) services that support an inclusive digital economy. Through NetOne Cellular (Pvt) Ltd, the Government is spearheading the Mobile BroadBand (MBB) Project as a vehicle to improve network accessibility and connectivity across the country. The project is being rolled out in phases and already the initial stages have resulted in previously marginalised communities being connected to the “information super highway” — being able to communicate with family across the globe. Broadband infrastructure, user devices and the relevant support infrastructure are foundational building blocks for a sustainable broadband ecosystem and, in turn, digital economy, said ICT, Postal and Courier Services Minister, Dr Jenfan Muswere. “The MBB Phase III project is expected to commence early 2021. The objectives of this phase of the project is to create high value sites to maximise on return on investment, network densification and consolidation in high value areas to increase data capacity, and decongest densely populated areas,” said Dr Muswere in emailed responses. “These towers will be provisioned for infrastructure sharing to ensure greater efficiency and optimal utilisation of resources and critical national infrastructure. The focus is to become data centric, to enable internet capacity and ensure preparedness to support the full implementation of the digital economy. “This will be a catalyst for the achievement of the 2030 upper middle-income economy vision, as well as enhance platforms to support programs such as education 5.0, smart health, smart agriculture, smart education, smart transport and develop connected communities that leverage on Smart cities, at a national, regional and global level. This Phase will be at a tune of US $71 million.” In its 2021 National Budget the Treasury also noted the importance of prioritising implementation of measures that create a conducive environment for private sector investment, full implementation of ICT infrastructure sharing, as well as full roll out of the e-Government programme. “The Netone National Expansion Project Phase II will kick off with loan funding from China Eximbank amounting US$71 million of which, ZWL$1,9 billion will be disbursed during 2021 and mainly targeting the roll out of the 4G network around the country,” said Finance and Economic Development Minister, Professor Mthuli Ncube. The NetOne expansion project began in 2011 as MBB Phase 1, to the tune of US$45 million, which initiated the state-owned entity’s network expansion and saw the installation of 100 new 3rd Generation (3G) and 350 new 2nd Generation(2G) base-stations across the country. The 2G Base stations are scalable and can be upgraded to 3G. This resulted in additional subscriber capacity expansion from 1,5 million to 2,5 million. Phase 1 was successfully completed in 2013. The MBB Phase II then commenced in 2014, with a view of more than doubling the subscriber capacity. Under this project a total of 2,231 base stations were added, that is, 1331 new 2G, 600 3G and 300 LTE base stations. In addition, 800 IP microwave transmission links were installed for backhauling to enhance the overall network quality and improve customer experience. NetOne also installed 100 eco-friendly pine-tree base stations that blend well with the environment as part of Phase II. A further 75 Lattice Mast towers were installed, including 500 generators for back-up power. MBB Phase II resulted in NetOne covering 75 percent of the population across the various technologies 2G,3G and 4G, which provide an array of services including voice, SMS, data and mobile financial services. This project was valued at US$218 million dollars. MBB Phase II was completed in 2016. Despite its disruptive impact, the Covid-19 pandemic has shown that technology was a new frontier for driving change and transformation within economies and communities in the conduct of day to day business. As such, the Government has said the thrust of NDS1 was to facilitate achievement of an e-enabled economy where all sectors embrace ICT to improve efficiency through exploiting opportunities that ensure a conducive business environment that enables access to ICT services through deployment of broadband infrastructure as well as implementation of “last mile connectivity”. “A total of ZWL$8 billion will be invested in the sector during 2021, mainly targeting rollout of the optic fibre network, digital television services and access to online public services by citizens,” said Prof Ncube.