The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
CHROME mining and smelting company, Zimasco Private Limited, has spent US$134 000 on corporate social responsibility projects as part of its mandate to give back to the community. The company has partnered Kwekwe City Council in the fight against Covid-19. It has also bought a refuse compactor for the local authority, which is expected to go a long way in maintaining a clean city. Other projects include borehole drilling and solar-powered water system in Mbizo and Amaveni suburbs. The company also installed 12 foot-operated hand washing facilities at public strategic centres including Kwekwe General Hospital, Mbizo Four Shopping Centre, council clinics, police stations as well as magistrates’ courts and registry offices at a cost of US$134 000. Officially handing over the facilities to Kwekwe City Council on Tuesday, Zimasco chief executive officer, Mr John Musekiwa said the company has always taken pride in being a good corporate citizen. “Zimasco acknowledges that sustainable value creation and the long-term viability of our chrome mining and smelting business depends among other initiatives, on continuous improvement in matters of safety, health and the protection of the environment,” he said. “This became more imperative following the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic in the early months of this year and as Zimasco we immediately recognized the need for us to assist our communities to fight the pandemic.” Mr Musekiwa said their support complements efforts by the city council to provide a clean environment and access to clean water. Zimasco engineers invented the handwashing facilities. Speaking at the handover of the facilities, Midlands Affairs and Devolution Minister, Senator Larry Mavima said the Government recognises the timely intervention by Zimasco, which complements the nation’s efforts to fight against the Covid-19 pandemic. “I am really excited with the good working relationship between Zimasco and Kwekwe City Council. The company’s CSR interventions will go a long way in mitigating the spread of covid-19 within the city,” said Minister Mavima. He urged other companies to emulate Zimasco. I therefore challenge other companies to also play a more visible role in assisting communities facing challenges,” said Minister Mavima. Acting Town Clerk, Dr Lucia Mnkandla, said council will ensure the facilities are put to good use.