The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Preparations for the fourth edition of the Shangano Arts Festival pencilled for December 29 to 30 are underway with the fete set to unite artistes from around the Sadc region. Artistes from Zimbabwe, Zambia and Botswana will partake in the event that will be largely held virtually. Running under the theme “Celebrating Mat North”, the two-day festival will see physical events being held at Hwange Little Theatre in Hwange. The virtual events will be streamed from Shangano Arts Trust’s Facebook page. Theatre group, Vulindlela from Matabeleland North, dance outfit Bolamba Culture Birds from Matabeleland South province, Pezhuba Pachena cultural dance group from Hwange, Chilimba cultural dance group from Binga, Matsosangwao cultural dance group from Botswana and Gule Wankulu dance group from Livingstone in Zambia are set to take to the stage. Female poets Euner Muzamba from Hwange, Providence Moyo from Tsholotsho, storyteller Nozizwe Mudenda from Binga, poets Jonathan Moyo from Lupane and Lawrence Penpusher from Hwange are also billed to perform. Also part of the line-up are Hwange musicians Rasfidzo, Divara, Muzion and Ninja king among others. Shangano Arts Trust founder and director Petros Ndhlovu said: “Shangano is a Nambya word meaning ‘meeting place’ hence the festival is being used as a platform for interaction, learning and sharing among artistes in Matabeleland North, African Southern Region and the world in general. “On day one, we’ll have a workshop for leaders of local groups in Hwange where topics such as arts management and theatre skills will be talked about in an interaction led by Lucky Munzabwa who is the director of Pezhuba Pachena Cultural Assemble. We’ll also host a discussion on basic information on SRHR and the constitution that will be shared among the artistes where Vostile Creative Trust director Malvern Daka will lead. “The last day will see performances being the order of the day from 10am,” said Ndhlovu. In the past, the festival rotated around Binga, Hwange, Victoria Falls, Lupane Tsholotsho and Dete. — @mthabisi_mthire.