The Chronicle The Judicial Service Commission (JSC) has been challenged to play a leading role in the fight against corruption which in some cases has been institutionalised in both the public and the private sector. The JSC has also been urged to speed up the conclusion of corruption cases before the courts as Government pursues a development agenda anchored on strong, responsive and transparent institutions. Speaking at the launch of the JSC Strategic Plan that will run from 2021 to 2025 last Wednesday, President Mnangagwa said the JSC is a critical State institution in the ongoing reform agenda with regards to entrenching constitutionalism and the rule of law as building blocks. “The rule of law should not be suffocated by incidences of corruption for narrow expediencies. My Government therefore expects the judiciary, as the custodians of the administration of justice, the rule of law and constitutionalism, to take prominent and leading role in the fight against corruption,” said President Mnangagwa. He commended the JSC for establishing specialised anti-corruption courts in line with the Government’s directive.
President Mnangagwa said the judiciary should, together with other arms of the State continue to promote peaceful and inclusive communities for sustainable development and the establishment of effective and accountable institutions accessible to everyone across the country. He said to achieve this, officials in both Government and the private sector should be held accountable for their actions. The President said values of a corruption free society should be inculcated in both individuals and organisations. It is a fact that the cancer of corruption has permeated all levels of society to the extent that some individuals now believe engaging in corruption is an acceptable way of conducting business. People are being asked to pay for services that should be free and police officers and soldiers enforcing the Covid-19 restriction regulations are demanding bribes from those found flouting the regulations such as opening bars and allowing patrons to drink in the bars. The safety of members of the public is being compromised by these corrupt officers that are not enforcing the regulations meant to minimise the spread of the pandemic. In some cases Government is being prejudiced of millions of dollars in duty at the country’s borders as individuals that are supposed to pay duty for imported goods pay bribes to officials. Corruption also compromises services delivery and in the private sector companies are losing millions of dollars as a result of corruption. The fight against corruption therefore calls for all Zimbabweans in both the public and private sector to rise to the challenge.