The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
A MAN believed to be in his early 20s drowned in a swimming pool in Tshitaudze suburb, formerly Hlalani Kuhle-Garikayi, in Beitbridge on Christmas Day. He is believed to have been part of a group of people who went to a recreational park in the area to celebrate the festive season when tragedy struck. His identity is yet to be established and the body was taken to Beitbridge District Hospital mortuary pending a post-mortem. Matabeleland South police spokesperson, Inspector Loveness Mangena confirmed the incident yesterday. “The man’s body was found at around midday on Boxing Day by one of the workers at the recreation park while cleaning the swimming pool,” she said. Inspector Mangena said the cleaner investigated further after failing to retrieve a huge object that was stuck in the water. “He discovered the corpse and informed his manager who alerted the police. “The body was retrieved and taken to the mortuary and further investigations are underway,” she said. The incident came a few days after the police recovered the body of a suspected border jumper who drowned in the Limpopo River while illegally crossing between South Africa and Zimbabwe. The body was found in an advanced state of decomposition. According to the police, the naked corpse was spotted trapped between rocks by a man who was looking for his donkeys near the Panda Mine area. The man informed the police who retrieved the remains from the river. The Limpopo River, now up to six metres deep, and many streams are in flood with heavy rains continuing in most parts of Beitbridge district and northern South Africa. The local Civil Protection Unit has since issued warnings to communities around Shashe, Umzingwane, and Limpopo rivers to take precautionary measures. Cases of drowning have become common in Beitbridge during the rain season. In January this year, two mourners from the Mtetengwe area drowned while taking a bath in the flooded Umzingwane River. Late last year, four fishermen drowned in the flooded Zhovhe Dam when a boat they were using capsized while they were casting fishing nets. The dam is located 63km west of Beitbridge along Umzingwane River. – @tupeyo