The Chronicle Sports Reporter
THE Global Esports Federation (GEF) marks a major milestone when it celebrates its first anniversary this month with the inaugural edition of the #worldconnected series (#wcs20). The #wcs20 is a community initiative inspired by the GEF’s values of equality, fair play, diversity, inclusion and innovation and will run from December 17-19. It comprises the Global Esports Convention (GEFcon) and a global collective of esports community events. GEFcon is a thought leadership platform and a leading ideas and innovation incubator developed in partnership with the GEF’s partner Sports Innovation Lab. It will feature exclusive live webinar sessions and a series of sessions on demand that are designed for the collective benefit of esports. The anniversary will be marked by a series of Regional Esports Competitions hosted by the GEF’s member federations across seven regions in the world, Caribbean, Europe, Middle East & North Africa, North America, South America, Southeast Asia and Sub-Sahara Africa. “It has been an eventful year since we embarked on the mission to establish the credibility, legitimacy and prestige for esports at the worldwide launch of the Global Esports Federation in Singapore,” said Chris Chan, president of the GEF. “The first #worldconnected series and GEFcon is truly a global platform bringing together our member federations and partners in support of our mission (of) cultivating collaborations, forging synergies, developing and growing the connections between esports and sport in communities across the world,” he said. Angela Ruggiero, co-founder and chief executive officer of the Sports Innovation Lab said: “Sports Innovation Lab is proud to partner with the Global Esports Federation to develop GEFcon, bringing leaders from across the esports and sporting communities to share ideas and to ignite the essential conversations about values that need to happen today.” Kelvin Tan, the GEF director of esports said they were overwhelmed with support from member federations across the world in hosting this community initiative. “The #wcs20 cements the Global Esports Federation’s commitment in developing forward-thinking and future oriented initiatives in service to the esports community. We look forward to welcoming the world’s esports athletes and players in this global celebration,” Tan said. Zimbabwe is represented in the GEF by veteran sports administrator and Zimpapers board chairperson Tommy Sithole, who chairs the federation’s governance and ethics commission, while Tyrone Seward, husband to Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation Minister Kirsty Coventry, will deputise Chester King in the education, culture and wellness commission.