The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
UK-based songstress Sharonrose Manhiri is a young musician with an old soul. Drawing inspiration from music greats like the late Oliver Mtukudzi and mbira musician Chiwoniso Maraire, Sharonrose says her music embodies Zimbabwean culture and soul. Growing up in the UK has not in any way diluted her love for Zimbabwe and the soul that inspires music from the southern African nation. Her soothing vocals, rich lyricism and ability to blend the Zimbabwean traditional sound to give a unique brand of music, Afrosoul, is what fans can expect from her upcoming single, Khumbul’ekhaya. The single from her EP Strings and Roses, which was released on December 1, is an early Christmas present for her fans back home. Having spent nearly a decade providing backing vocals for several musicians and singing at corporate functions, Sharonrose believes the new single will launch her solo journey. Khumbul’ekhaya is a song about a lovesick person who longs to see their lover after a long time apart. The song can also relate to homesick people staying abroad. “It’s a true reflection of how we sometimes feel when we are far from our loved ones. We always long to go back home where love is,” Sharonrose said in an interview with Chronicle Showbiz from her Wolverhampton base. “I wanted to paint a story about how it feels when you are both lovesick and homesick.” Sharonrose believes that the song will also be her breakthrough into the music industry. “While I have been in the music industry for many years as a backing vocalist, I consider Khumbul’ekhaya to be my Genesis, my introduction to the world. My goal is to spread love, positivity and inspiration through my music and these are the three words I would use to describe this song,” she said. The reverberating sounds of the mbira-styled guitar by Sam Siwela and choral harmonies towards the climax of the track, would conjure nostalgia in listeners. To get the African feel in the song, Sharonrose collaborated with top Bulawayo ensemble, the Outfit band, while she used another local videographer, FMG to capture scenes from the City of Kings “These are things people can relate to and identify with. That has always been the beauty of our music for me, you can relate to it and find yourself in it. This is what I hope people will get from my music,” the guitarist-cum-vocalist said. “I wanted the whole song to have a touch of home. It was a challenge working on everything remotely, but I learnt so much during this process and I’m raring to go with the next projects I will be working on.” While maintaining a youthful feel to music, one can tell the inspiration of old timers like Maraire in her music. Born in Mutare and relocating to the UK at a tender age, Sharonrose used local music to keep in touch with her Zimbabwean roots. Other groups that have influenced her sound include the Bhundu Boys, a yesteryear hit band which toured the world during its heydays. “I’m a young woman with an old soul. Having been raised between two cultures I went through an identity crisis like many kids who suddenly find themselves in the diaspora. When I was 13, I started listening to a lot of Zimbabwean music. “Listening to legends like Oliver Mtukudzi and Chiwoniso, I felt a real sense of self identity. I would spend hours listening to Bhundu Boys and System Tazvida and be fascinated by how our lyrics paint stories. This has been a huge inspiration for me explaining why I write songs that tell stories, stories that people can relate to,” she said.