The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
The festive season this year is subdued and it seems that is the same way people will celebrate Christmas Day on Friday. This year, things are very peculiar in light of Covid-19 that has affected every facet of people’s lives. Large gatherings remain banned as that is where Covid-19 spreads. Covid-19 has taken away the joy of being a human being, restricting and banning hugs, kisses, handshakes and just socialising. During this time, there is a movie that television stations like running, How the Grinch Stole Christmas! a film based on a book by Theodore “Dr. Seuss” Geisel. The story follows the Grinch, a grumpy, solitary creature who attempts to put an end to Christmas by stealing Christmas-themed items from the homes of the nearby town Whoville such as food, gifts and decorations on Christmas Eve. In this case, from the onset of the year, Covid-19 has been stealing the most cherished thing in people’s lives, social gatherings. Some people around Bulawayo said this is a different type of festive season as Covid-19 has affected everything.
Artistes who usually turn to their families at this time of the year said besides having their incomes affected, Covid-19 has also affected their typical holiday schedules. “This year, I’ll be at home with my family. For me, this is the time for family. Usually, we go to the rural areas in Gwanda and meet with the family at my grandmother’s house. But because of Covid-19, we aren’t going there,” said Madlela Skhobokhobo. Mollet Tshuma from Luveve suburb, Bulawayo said she was worried that she will not be able to travel to the rural areas. “I want to go to my rural area for Christmas but it’s going to be hard as I foresee long queues and not enough transport. This pandemic has just turned everything upside down,” said Tshuma. Singer and performer Novuyo Seagirl said this year has forced families to stay together. “We’ve been stuck with our families the whole year so there’s nothing different with what will happen on Christmas Day. “We normally go to church on the day but this time we won’t because of the pandemic,” said Novuyo. Things that people took for granted back then are now treasured the most. For instance, in Bulawayo, the nativity plays at schools, Carols by Candlelight and Santaland at the Zimbabwe International Exhibition Centre have all been cancelled and are now being yearned for by many. Father Christmas or Santa Claus at various department stores is wearing a mask with children not allowed to sit on his lap as they are now required to stand in front of him and take pictures as part of measures to contain the Covid-19 pandemic. Some are going as far as being housed in a plastic bubble.