The Chronicle Business Reporter
TOP performing companies in the retail and wholesale sector have scooped awards in different categories in recognition of their contribution to the economy and community development.
The Confederation of Zimbabwe Retailers (CZR) organised the annual event, which was held in Harare on December 04, 2020. The retail sector is a key pillar in the country’s economy and dominates the services industry with many people employed under it. It is a link between producers and consumers. Consumers benefit immensely from the vibrant retail sector as it performs marketing functions that make it possible for customers to access a variety of products and services. There were 36 award categories this year cutting across diverse sectors of the economy. In each category there was a winner, first runner up and second runner up and there were different category sponsors. Most awards were scooped by Harare headquartered companies, which also have footprint across the country but companies from the southern region also made a strong statement. Giant brands such as Fazak, Choppies, Bata Shoe Company and Datlabs were among the winners. Nice Time, a company from the Midlands made it on regional appreciation wholesale sector while in Bulawayo Broadway Spar, Greens Supermarket and Food 4 Less also emerged top. Among the top categories is the fast-food retailer of the year, best retailer/wholesaler of the year branch network, I T and stationery retailer of the year, hardware and electrical, best integrated market campaign and the liquor outlet category. Other notable categories include the SME retailer/wholesaler of the year, SME special recognition award, corporate social responsibility award, most innovative retailer/wholesaler, fast growing retailer/wholesaler, motor spares retailer or wholesaler and rural retailer or wholesaler of the year. The pharmaceutical retailers and wholesalers and their peers in furniture sector were also honoured. Other exciting categories included an award for outstanding store design, most improved retailer, best supplier and the best brand. There was also an award for the best shopping mall, and butchery of the year. Several companies also made it into this year’s top 100 retail value chain business leaders, top 100 suppliers, which included both established firms and medium sized enterprises. In order to motivate budding businesses and for purposes of mainstreaming gender equality, the CZR awards also honoured young retailers and wholesalers with a special category also established to honour the best female retailer or wholesaler. This also covered the new product initiative award. Furniture suppliers and fashion retailers also got the share of the prestigious awards.