The Chronicle Midlands Bureau Chief
COMMUNITIES in the Midlands Province have started benefiting from devolution programmes since the release of more than $100 million to local authorities by Government from the beginning of year. The amount is more than double what was released for devolution projects in the province last November. There are eight administrative districts and 14 local authorities in the province. The 14 local authorities which include rural and urban councils have been receiving varying amounts of money from Central Government meant to fund projects to improve the people’s welfare. President Mnangagwa has said devolution was adopted as a key component of the 2013 Constitution. Devolution ensures the preservation of national unity in Zimbabwe, prevention of all forms of disunity and promotion of democratic participation in Government by Zimbabweans. The Government stresses that there must be devolution of power and responsibilities to lower tiers of Government. Midlands Provincial Development Coordinator Mr Abiot Maronge said there was commendable development in terms of devolution projects in the province. He said it is the wish of the Second Republic to improve the livelihoods of marginalised communities. Mr Maronge said projects being funded included road construction, building or upgrading health facilities, construction of classrooms and drilling boreholes or sinking wells. “Over $100million has been disbursed to the 14 rural and urban local authorities in the province which are in our eight administrative districts. “We are targeting the remote areas to ensure that our people get services they don’t usually get. People should be able to get water, electricity and access health care facilities. “This is in line with the Government’s vision of an upper-middle-income economy by 2030,” he said. In Chirumanzu Ward six council is constructing Hwata Clinic using devolution money. This development is expected to improve health services delivery in the area where villagers are walking close to 20 kilometres to access the nearest health care facility. The state-of-the-art clinic which is 70 percent complete, will have two staff houses, an outpatient consultation room, maternity ward, male and female as well as juvenile wards. Roads in Mvuma town are also being rehabilitated and over 15 boreholes have been sunk so that people have access to clean water. Chirumhanzu District Development Coordinator Mr Vafios Hlavati said people were being empowered through devolution funds. “We received about $5million which has gone towards sinking of boreholes to rehabilitating of roads and construction of clinics. We thank the Second Republic for rolling out this programme and releasing the funds,” he said. “This is exactly what Government had in mind when they came up with the devolution idea,” he said. Runde Rural District Council (RDC) has started the construction of a 7,9km water pipeline to service two secondary and three primary schools. Zvishavane Town Council is rehabilitating the Mabula Sewer Ponds as well as resuscitating the Runde Water Plant using the devolution funds. In Shurugwi, there are clinics that are being constructed as well as a water treatment plant. Mberengwa RDC bought equipment for road construction. It is also constructing three clinics and several schools have been rehabilitated. “The funds from Government should be used to create investment opportunities in the districts. We want life-changing programmes to be implemented in the communities,” said Mr Hlavati.