The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
It was a double celebration for musician Msiz’Kay after he won the Roil Bulawayo Arts Award (RoilBAA) Outstanding Male Artiste gong and a music video he features in clocked two million views on YouTube over the weekend. The music video of the song Happy was produced by Brazilian outfits Fancy Inc, Drunky Daniels and Vintage Culture. It was released last month and as of yesterday afternoon, it had garnered over two and a half million views. The song that went under the radar for most Zimbabweans has certainly underpinned the work Msiz’Kay of the Ngawuz’umoya Wami fame has done this past year. Interestingly, the Happy visuals were shot in Bulawayo with Msiz’kay captured walking on the city’s streets. Also featured on the video are fellow Zimbabwean artistes, Tebza, Fish S Ndaramu, actor Charmaine Mudau, Bolamba Culture Birds and Taffy Dube. Msiz’Kay said the duo of Drunky Daniels DJs was instrumental in him getting on the track with Vintage Culture after he was introduced to them by Bulawayo producer K.O.D who was working with the Brazilian-based outfit. “My relationship with Drunky Daniels dates back to their album Zabumba that came out in 2019 when we collaborated on a song called Hello on the same album. “The song Happy came about back in November 2019 when one of the Drunky Daniels members sent me an instrumental sample and asked me to collaborate with him on a song. “Afterwards, the unreleased demo was heard in Brazil by Fancy Inc and Vintage Culture who loved the idea and we all came together to put out an amazing record,” said Msiz’Kay. Widely considered to be one of the best DJs in Brazil, Vintage Culture regularly sells out shows across South America and beyond, racking up over 1,2 billion streams across his back catalogue and receiving support from global stars like Tiesto, Martin Garrix and Diplo. This year, Vintage Culture collaborated with and remixed music from fellow global superstars Tiesto, David Guetta, Moby, Alok and Joel Corry. Turning to his RoiBAA win, Msiz’Kay said it was proof that he worked hard this past year. “This award means so much to me. It represents appreciation for all the work that I put in this year, the music that I put out and the steps that I took to grow my brand. “It’s been a challenging year for me, especially since I was not able to perform and travel as before, but despite all of that, I am grateful that I still managed to put out some amazing music and collaborate with so many amazing artistes, both locally and internationally,” said Msiz’Kay. The talented artiste has been putting in the work this past year releasing music, mostly collaborations with artistes such as Asaph on As’pheli Moya, J Van on Wadidizela and Ngawuz’umoya Wami where he roped in Awa Khiwe and Mzoe 7. — @bonganinkunzi