The Chronicle Chronicle Reporter
Zimpapers Beitbridge Bureau Chief Thupeyo Muleya has been conferred with the Sustainability Reporter of the Year Award at the Matabeleland provincial edition of the Environmental, Responsible Business and Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Awards. The award, which covers both Matabeleland provinces is in recognition of a series of environmental news and feature stories he covered in Beitbridge particularly focussing on pollution and climate change. Conferring the award, the Environmental Management Agency (EMA) and The Corporate Social Responsibility Network Zimbabwe (CSRNZ) said they were keen to celebrate and appreciate excellence through awards to the lead performers in this trajectory. “The awards are inspired by the immense contribution and involvement in the sustainable management of the environment, adoption of best business practices, empowering communities and growing the economy in Zimbabwe,” EMA and CSR network Zimbabwe said in a joint statement. Award winners, they said, are selected from diverse sectors of the economy where they have created a positive impact on Zimbabwe’s sustainable development. This, they said, dovetailed with the country’s vision 2030 and Sustainable Development Goals, Excellence in environmentally sustainable and best business practices that remain critical in the sustainable development agenda, and in supporting the green economy. “To that end, the Environmental Management Agency (EMA) and Corporate Social Responsibility Network Zimbabwe (CSRNZ) want to celebrate this excellence in an endeavour to promote and perpetuate sustainable and best practices. CSRNZ is a non-profit making organisation which is aimed at raising awareness, build capacity, promote and support the development and implementation of best Corporate Social Responsibility practices in the public and private sectors. The platform also gives organisations the best opportunities to showcase, learn and share best practices in Corporate Social Investment. Accepting the award, Muleya said he owed it to teamwork and the Zimpapers family. “I acknowledge the recognition and owe this to my family both at home and the Zimpapers stable,” said Muleya.