The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
THE First Lady, Auxillia Mnangagwa, has encouraged entrepreneurs to be patient and continue working hard to develop their businesses. The First Lady was in Victoria Falls between Thursday and Saturday where she had an interface with female councillors from all local authorities around the country before leading a fundraising golf tournament whose aim is to raise funds for Chambuta Children’s Home in Chiredzi. After teeing off at the Elephant Hills Golf Course, the First Lady, accompanied by Bulawayo Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister, Judith Ncube, visited the Lugwasyano Curio Market, Art and Craft, and Zambezi Arts and Craft Women markets where she interacted with the female vendors. The markets reopened recently having closed in March when the country effected lockdown as a result of Covid-19. The vendors reopened in anticipation of getting customers during the festive season although business has remained low. The women were excited about the First Lady’s visit, which they said was a blessing for the informal business. A philanthropist in her own right, the First Lady made a number of stops within the two indoor markets and one open space market chatting with women who could not hide their excitement as they explained to her how they do business and the challenges they face. She bought a number of artefacts including beads and necklaces with African colours. During her informal chit-chat with some of the women, the First Lady commended their work and urged them to continue working hard. “These are nice products. Keep working hard. Things will be fine,” she said. Minister Ncube also praised the women for “doing a lot of good work to support families.” The women were charmed by the First Lady’s visit. “We opened recently in anticipation of getting customers but business is very low because of the lockdown. Few people come to the market hence we have no customers at all. However, today I am very happy because the First Lady bought a necklace from me,” said Ms Tsitsi Banda. Ms Olita Sibanda said the visit was a blessing for the informal traders. “We are so happy and hope this is a blessing, which will bring business for us. We have been out of business for months and we feel encouraged seeing that our leaders think and feel for us, this is a blessing,” she said. Another vendor Ms Siyani Sibanda said: “We opened because we are getting into the Christmas holidays where traditionally there will be clients. So far, we have been coming here just to clean our premises and sleep and we don’t know if we will get any business this year. “The coming of the First Lady brings us hope and it shows that the local market can also support us.” The women also presented the First Lady with some gifts comprising traditionally made artefacts and curios.
Other curio markets around the area such as Sinathankawu, Busy Island and others have also been open but with low business. – @ncubeleon