The Chronicle Pride Mahlangu, Business Reporter
FAST FOOD company, Hotplate Grillhouse Zimbabwe, has opened seven more branches this year bringing to 10 the total number of its branches countrywide. The local franchise, which is part of the South African food outlet Hotplate Grillhouse, has created 300 jobs after expanding its footprint to the country last year with only three stores. Hotplate Grillhouse Zimbabwe chief executive officer, Mr Benson Muneri, said their business expansion was being driven by growing demand for the service, which resulted in US$400 investment. In Bulawayo the company has opened two branches where it has recruited about 30 locals as permanent workers. “We have managed to sit back during lockdown and reinvent our stores and strategise how best we can appeal to the local markets and the results have been rewarding,” said Mr Muneri. “Against all the odds where the industry has been under immense pressure due to the Covid-19 lockdown worldwide, we have been blessed enough to receive massive local support from our ever growing clientele base and high demand of our product due to our affordable offering and African look and feel of our stores. “The demand for our unique menu offering has outgrown the challenges we all faced due to the pandemic,” said Mr Muneri. He said most of the new Hotplate Grillhouse branches had been opened at fuel service stations for visibility and awareness. “It’s a strategy we had after analysing the extent of fuel shortages in the country, we realised that for a brand to land where there was automatic visibility and awareness, it had to land at a fuel station due to endless queues. It has proved to be a masterpiece and we are now known everywhere,” said Mr Muneri. He said 16 new stores were set to be opened in 2021 with plans underway to collaborate with Vivo Zimbabwe to roll out more stores at service stations and other standalone stores in towns and major cities. “We are humbled by the local support we have received in Zimbabwe and appreciate every single client that graces our stores daily,” said Mr Muneri. — @pridesinstinctz.