The Chronicle LONDON – Former Liverpool and Aston Villa manager Gerard Houllier has passed away at the age of 73, sadly leaving behind his wife, sons and grandchildren. The Frenchman managed the Reds from 1998-2004 and led them to five major trophies, including the FA Cup, League Cup and Uefa Cup treble in 2000-01. Prior to Liverpool, Houllier managed Lens, Paris St-Germain and the French national team, and after leaving the Reds won two Ligue 1 titles at Lyon. His last managerial job was at Aston Villa, but he left in 2011 after nine months, following heart problems.
Reports in France yesterday morning confirmed the former Lyon manager had died just days after he underwent a heart operation. The Frenchman rose to prominence in the English Premier League when he took charge of Liverpool in 1998 and he stayed at Anfield for six years, winning five trophies in a trophy-laden stint. Houllier suffered from bad health during his time on Merseyside, with his assistant Phil Thompson having to take charge of the side for half a season in 2001 after the Frenchman was diagnosed with a heart condition. Houllier was forced into emergency surgery and the condition troubled him throughout the remainder of his career, despite making a return to football. After departing Liverpool in 2004, Houllier joined Lyon a year later but he felt he had unfinished business in England and made a surprise return to the Premier League with Aston Villa in 2010. However, Houllier lasted just a season at Villa Park after he fell ill towards the end of his first campaign in Birmingham and he subsequently stepped down due to his poor health. Houllier was part of a new wave of foreign managers that joined the English Premier League in the late 1990s and his methods were considered revolutionary at the time, with himself and Arsene Wenger helping to shape English football’s new look. The football world is mourning and tributes were flooding in on social media. In a statement, Liverpool said they were “deeply saddened” by Houllier’s death. “We are mourning the passing of our treble-winning manager, Gerard Houllier,” the club said. “The thoughts of everyone at Liverpool Football Club are with Gerard’s family and many friends.” Aston Villa said: “All at Aston Villa are deeply saddened to learn of the passing of Gerard Houllier, our manager during the 2010/11 season. “Our thoughts are with Gerard’s loved ones at this incredibly difficult time.” – Metro