The Chronicle Oleen Ndori
This year marks 33 years since the historic Unity Accord signed by PF-Zapu and Zanu (PF) to form the united-Zanu-PF party. The nation continues to celebrate a day that signifies the lasting legacy passed on to every Zimbabwean by the late revolutionary icons, Cdes Robert Mugabe and Joshua Nkomo. Ushered in the search for peace; the Unity Accord was a successful attempt to bridging gaps in post-colonial Zimbabwe. After signing the historic pact on the 22nd of December 1987; the late founding father of Zimbabwe, President Robert Mugabe stated that: “Today is a great day because we have seen the coming together in body, mind and spirit of two parties; what we are witnessing is a tremendous blow to the forces of negation, forces of division and forces of destruction.” His counterpart and late Vice President, Cde Joshua Nkomo concurred saying, “The accord is the beginning of unity, for unity is just not the signing of documents, unity is what follows.” The historic 1987 agreement was signed to end divisions between the two revolutionary parties that had virtuously fought together for independence. The two parties joined forces at Lancaster House in 1979 but soon after independence they turned into political rivals and contested the elections separately. The late Vice President, Dr Simon Vengai Muzenda described the signing of the accord as a return to values that drove people to fight for independence and the true values of ubuntu. Fast forward 33 years later the unity accord remains a guiding principle after laying a strong and lasting foundation for national unity which is the bedrock of stability and harmony. President Mnangagwa described the Unity Accord as a national ethic and value which rises above party politics. “All generations, all citizens and all leaders of this nation, must continue to renew, affirm and reaffirm our unity as a people. We should never tire to work for national unity, to think, act and to live true to its dictates. Zimbabwe is and must remain home to all who belong to, reside and believe in it. I revere and celebrate the Unity Accord because it is a national ethic and value which rises above party politics. It is a core part of processes which founded our nation and keeps us together as a nation. During the liberation struggle, both ZANLA and ZIPRA progressively came together and fought against settlers as a united force. The Unity Accord is, thus deeply rooted in our history. Today more than ever before we need national unity”. Since the signing of the accord in 1987 the nation has seen tremendous development across the country particularly in socio-economic areas of health and education and as Zimbabwe seeks to reaffirm its position globally in the spirit of Vision 2030 the maintenance of unity, peace and harmony remains key. — ZBC