The Chronicle Business Editor
THE Securities and Exchange Commission of Zimbabwe (SECZ) on Friday officially launched its “Investment 101 Handbook” and capital markets educational video meant to enhance public financial knowledge and unlock the value of participating in capital markets. Finance and Economic Development Minister, Professor Mthuli Ncube, presided over the launch of the detailed investment handbook and the educational “Gazaland miller” stock market video at a local hotel. Business leaders, academics, local investors and members of the capital markets and financial services sector, witnessed the launch. The handbook provides virtually all the information an investor may need to get going, making informed decisions and asking the right questions. The gathering also had opportunity to watch the video, which shows how small businesses can ride on capital markets to grow until they list on the Zimbabwe Stock Exchange (ZSE). Anchored on two sides of the investment story — the investor (public/organisation), and the securities issuer, which is the listed company, the video illustrates in a simple way how capital markets work, highlights inherent risks and how these could be tackled. In his remarks Prof Ncube said members of the public were potential investors and what was needed was to equip them with financial literacy to enhance their participation in financial markets. “The growth of participation on the capital markets is underpinned by financial inclusion. The work is just beginning to open up the space to the average man and woman, lowering and removing barriers to participating on the capital markets,” said the minister. SECZ chief executive officer, Mr Tafadzwa Chinamo, stressed the need to expand education and awareness programmes to benefit both issuers and investors. As such, he said SECZ in conjunction with the Investor Protection Fund (IPF) were committed to seeing the growth of capital markets participation. “This can only be achieved through providing information to demystify this space and open it up to the woman on the street, making her aware that she too can invest and grow her wealth in the long term,” said Mr Chinamo. As the regulator, he said SECZ would continue creating and maintaining a safe and sound investment environment in the securities and capital markets of Zimbabwe. He said this was being done through provision of high levels of investor protection, reducing systematic risk and promoting market integrity and investor confidence.