The Chronicle Chronicle Reporter
THE Political Actors Dialogue (Polad) has said it will remain actively involved in coming up with proposals to uplift the economy while promoting social cohesion. In a statement, Polad said despite the advent of the Covid-19 pandemic, 2020 has been eventful for all political parties represented and they look forward to meaningful engagement that will further develop the country. Polad said one of its 2020 successes include hosting an Anti-Corruption workshop which brought together all the major players in the fight against corruption. During the workshop, Polad reaffirmed its position that active public involvement is required in combating corruption in Zimbabwe. The organisation also continued to call for the unconditional removal of sanctions against Zimbabwe which have not only hampered national development but have resulted in untold suffering of citizens. “Polad successfully hosted an Economic Summit which came up with strategies to stimulate economic growth. To that end, a report was produced incorporating all the recommendations which was submitted to the President of the Republic of Zimbabwe, Cde Mnangagwa. Some of the recommendations are already being implemented which shows Government’s commitment in addressing the nation’s challenges,” read the statement. It said part of its 2020 activities included working on proposals on political and electoral reforms which will be tabled before the Government soon. The statement also highlighted how the organisation had partnered with the Ad Hoc Inter-Ministerial Taskforce on Covid-19 to understand Government’s responsiveness towards combating the pandemic. “Polad commends the measures that the Government has put in place to mitigate the spread of Covid-19 and calls upon all stakeholders to continue supporting the Government in its quest to curb the virus. Another highlight was the engagement with Captains of industry which provided an opportunity for Polad to deliberate on the specific challenges being faced by the business community during this Covid-19 era.” Polad also urged residents to work on an integrated approach to foster national healing and building. “We are also calling on the Government to provide safety nets for the vulnerable people in our community, particularly during this unprecedented time. Fellow Zimbabweans, during the festive season let us continue to take Covid-19 protective measures so as to safeguard our communities.”