The Chronicle Sports Reporter
TUSKERS captain Nomvelo Sibanda says they prefer the underdog tag going into today’s women’s T20 cricket final against Eagles at Takashinga Sports Club in Harare’s Highfield suburb. Eagles go into this afternoon’s final as favourites having beaten their Bulawayo-based opponents home and away during the round-robin stage. Sibanda said Eagles are just like any other team and they were not afraid of facing them for the third time. “We’re the underdogs, but we are actually in the final,” said Sibanda. “I personally treat each player the same. One might think this player is better than the other one, but the one you are not minding turns out to be the best for the day. I actually treat the 11 (opposing players) that are on the field the same,” she declared. Sibanda and Tasmeen Granger are key to Tuskers’ success, particularly with the ball. Granger leads the tournament’s wickets chart with seven, alongside Precious Marange of Eagles and Mountaineers’ rising bowling star Francesca Chipare. Eagles will be led by captain Modester Mupachikwa, who is second behind Rhinos’ Mary-Anne Musonda in the batting standings. With a batting average of 64.67, Mupachikwa will be the obvious headache for Tuskers. She, however, said the favourites’ tag counts for nothing going into the game. “We are not concerned about the favourites tag and are just focusing on the job at hand and will basically stick to our game plan. At the end of the day, whether you win or lose, it is not the end of the world,” Mupachikwa said. Tomorrow two other provincial women’s sides, Mountaineers and Rhinos, clash in the Fifty50 Challenge final at the same venue. Both teams took one match off each other in the round-robin stage and ended with identical numbers of wins and losses. Mountaineers only finished tops thanks to a better net run rate. Rhinos captain Josephine Nkomo said lifting the Fifty50 Challenge silverware with her youthful side will come down to who wants it more on the day. “I think Mountaineers are an evenly balanced team and I can’t say who from that team is the most dangerous,” Nkomo said. “We are just looking forward to keeping things simple, just doing the basics right and minimising mistakes. I believe the team that makes the least mistakes will win the title.” Mountaineers skipper Pellagia Mujaji said her side will be guarding against complacency. “I do agree we go into the final as the favourites, but it was due to a lot of hard work we put in as a team. Winning this final will set a good tone for the Mountaineers ladies since it will be our first. So, we are hoping for a good result at the end of the day,” Mujaji said.