The Chronicle Prosper Ndlovu, Business Editor
GOVERNMENT expects increased innovation to drive research and development towards creation of information and communication technology (ICT) solutions that substitute imports and assist the country to reduce the import bill, a Cabinet Minister has said. Due to constrained industrial capacity, the country is losing millions of dollars each year to cheap imports, some of which can be produced locally. Economic experts say a higher import bill leads to trade deficit, drains the economy of scarce foreign exchange resources and weakens the domestic job market. The national industrialisation and development agenda relies on research and development as the country pursues implementation of the National Development Strategy (NDS1:2021-2025) towards Vision 2030. This makes domestication of industrial value chains paramount, with ICT solutions expected to play a key role. Speaking at the 2nd Postal and Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe (Potraz) 2020 Hackathon in Bulawayo last Friday, the Minister of ICT, Postal and Courier Services, Dr Jenfan Muswere, called for increased innovation. He said the Government has embraced research and development as key instruments in keeping the country abreast with ICT technological advancements. “My ministry is encouraging focused research so that we are able to develop our own ICT solutions and substitute imports and, in the process, reduce our import bill thereby reserving the much-needed foreign currency for things that we cannot produce,” said Dr Muswere. “The scale and ambition of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) require innovation if the 2030 agenda is to be achieved. “Indeed, to achieve these ambitious goals, new modalities for development are required, including bringing innovation into the foreground of development projects.” In its 2021 National Budget, the Treasury has also prioritised innovation, science, technology and industrial development with an allocation of $5,5 billion set aside for such projects. As such, Dr Muswere said his ministry would play its role to ensure the country becomes a robust digital economy in line with the ‘Smart Zimbabwe 2030 Master Plan”. He said the ICT sector has already crafted a Strategic Plan for the period 2021-2023, which is hinged on four core values namely -transparency, professionalism, creativity and teamwork. The minister said the Potraz hackathon was critical in encouraging innovation and facilitating uptake of new technologies that are building blocks for a modern economy. Unlike the inaugural hackathon, which was only open to universities, this year’s event was opened to all innovators. Apart from Harare and Bulawayo, the hackathon drew participants from small towns and districts who had an opportunity to pitch and showcase their innovations. As part of the ICT innovation drive, Potraz received 53 applications for participation at this year’s event and only 12 proposals emerged top. The winners from the contest would be assisted with funding by Potraz to turn their ideas into solutions that will benefit the country’s economy. ICT, Postal and Courier Services Deputy Minister, Dingumuzi Phuthi, ministry secretary Dr Sam Kundishora and Potraz director general, Dr Gift Machengete attended the event.