The Chronicle The first Manchester Derby of the season is almost upon us and, as ever, the stakes couldn’t be much higher for both United and City. After his side were knocked out of the Champions League midweek, the pressure is once again mounting on Red Devils boss Ole Gunnar Solskjaer. Some have suggested a defeat on Saturday could be the final straw, and both Ed Woodward and Mauricio Pochettino will no doubt be watching proceedings with interest. City, meanwhile, have won four of their last five in all competitions, and Pep Guardiola will be hoping to keep the momentum going as they look to continue their rise up the table. So who will come out on top at Old Trafford? Here is what our reporters think… Alex Milne – Man Utd 1-3 Man City Tuesday’s defeat to RB Leipzig showed that United simply cannot continue to start slowly and expect to get anything out of games against quality opposition. They have been dreadful in the first half of each of their last three matches, and a similar showing against a rapidly-improving City would leave them with another impossible mountain to climb. Things suddenly seem to be starting to click for Pep Guardiola’s side, and a win at Old Trafford would send out a big statement that they are truly back in business. I don’t think Solskjaer will be sacked with a defeat – but any further dropped points before Christmas against Sheffield United or Leeds would surely see him handed his P45. James Nursey – Man Utd 1-2 Man City Manchester City must surely be the last team Manchester United will want to be facing after being dumped out of the Champions League in midweek. City can move above United in the Premier League with a win at Old Trafford on Saturday. Pep Guardiola’s men have form on their side after just one defeat in 15 games in all competitions. And with United in the grip of the latest Paul Pogba circus, the visitors will think their neighbours are there for the taking as the pressure continues to grow on Ole Gunnar Solskjaer. Steve Bates – Man Utd 2-4 Man City This is just the kind of game Ole Gunnar Solskjaer could do without right now with his leadership of Manchester United coming under harsh scrutiny. After almost two years in charge United fans are wondering whether his team are on the right track and if he’s the right man to stay at the helm with Mauricio Pochettino and Max Allegri waiting in the wings. After watching United’s defence lacerated in Leipzig, Pep Guardiola must be rubbing his hands in anticipation with his free-scoring City stars back in the groove. United will score – but so will City and with Sergio Aguero fit again the omens don’t look good for a City side who often tend to flourish at Old Trafford. If you’re a United fan look away now. Mike Walters – Man Utd 1-3 Man City The last thing Ole Gunnar Solskjaer needs, after being turfed out of the Champions League, is a visit from the noisy neighbours. But like a Boxing Day hangover, he’s going to need more plink-plink fizz – because City are working up a head of steam and Solskjaer has yet to produce convincing evidence that he’s found a cure for United’s dismal home form this season. They have already lost to Palace, Tottenham and Arsenal at Old Trafford, not to mention West Brom being robbed blind, and Pep Guardiola doesn’t do sympathy. Big games against sworn enemies tend to bring out the best in United – for six months, they were the only team to take a point off Liverpool last season, and their record against the Blue Moon is decent enough – but City have the wind in their sails. Say your prayers, Ole: This is Amen Corner. Neil McLeman – Man Utd 2-1 Man City Manchester United are the new Arsenal – former title contenders now only in the running for cups but still capable of beating the big teams. This is a huge game for Solksjaer and United. And he should tell Paul Pogba to go out and show he is worth a transfer to Real Madrid, Juventus or PSG. David Anderson – Man Utd 1-2 Man City For all their troubles this season, Manchester United go into the derby a point ahead of Manchester City. Ole Gunnar Solskjaer could be forgiven for wondering why the intense media spotlight is shinning so intently on him and not Pep Guardiola for the Blues’ underwhelming start to the season. But Solskjaer is undoubtedly under pressure after the shambolic defeat to RB Leipzig on Tuesday in what proved to be a comeback too far for United. Dropping out of the Champions League is a black mark against his name for this season and beating City would be the perfect way to transform the sombre mood at Old Trafford. United are capable of beating City, as they proved last season when they beat them three times. Yet I am leaning towards City in this one. They have managed to fly below the radar this season while all the attention has been on Jurgen Klopp’s rants and Liverpool’s injuries, Tottenham’s fine start, Chelsea ’s recovery under Frank Lampard and United’s on-going struggles. They have won their last two league games, albeit against Burnley and Fulham, and are keeping clean sheets again. I sense they are beginning to find their stride and their best beats United’s best every day. Freddie Keighley – Man Utd 2-2 Man City Ahead of Saturday’s derby, the pressure on Ole Gunnar Solskjaer is at an all-time high after Manchester United’s elimination from the Champions League at the hands of RB Leipzig. But the Red Devils boss has a knack of pulling an important result out of the bag when he’s up against it. Couple that with Solskjaer’s recent success against Manchester City – winning three of last season’s four derbies – and it’s hard to side against United. If they are able to sit deep and counter-attack effectively like Tottenham did in their 2-0 win over City last month, then United may hold Pep Guardiola’s side to an entertaining draw at Old Trafford. Darren Wells – Man Utd 0-3 Man City United are coming off the back of a demoralising week in Europe and will be flat on confidence going into the clash with their rivals. Meanwhile, Man City have shown better form since their defeat to Tottenham, and had the added bonus of an easier night’s work in the Champions League. Pep Guardiola’s side won’t want to suffer the same fate as their last outing at Old Trafford and will be prepared for United’s plan to soak up pressure and counter-attack. Sadly for Solskjaer, his side have struggled at Old Trafford against the big sides this season, and opponents don’t come much more clinical than City, who should have no problems putting United’s defence to the sword. – Mirror Sport 