The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Business Reporter
THE National Development Strategy (NDS1:2021-2025) blueprint is expected to facilitate increased empowerment of women and enhance gender equality in the country. President Mnangagwa launched the five-year strategy two weeks ago, which outlines key economic development focus areas building on the successes recorded under the Transitional Stabilisation Programme (TSP), which expires this month. Speaking to women entrepreneurs in Plumtree on Friday, the Minister of State in Vice President Dr Constantino Chiwenga’s Office, Dr Evelyn Ndlovu, said the Government has established a number of funding structures to assist budding businesses with a bias to empower women-led enterprises. She said the operationalisation of the Empower Bank and Women`s Bank, in particular, was confirmation of Government’s commitment to support women businesses. These efforts are meant to buttress attainment of an upper middle-income economy by 2030. Dr Ndlovu urged women to take advantage of such financial institutions to grow their businesses and contribute meaningfully to the mainstream economy. The minister’s remarks come on the backdrop of concerns that Matabeleland region generally has the least number of applicants for loans from the Women’s Bank since its launch in 2018. Official reports indicate that only 202 loans worth $338 295 were disbursed to women in Bulawayo in 2019, with 80 loans to the tune of $259 000 advanced to Matabeleland South and 70 in Matabeleland North valued at $160 300.
Dr Ndlovu said women in Plumtree town and sister districts in Bulilima and Mangwe have not taken advantage of the bank to access loans to enable them to start businesses. “Our Government in its wisdom established banks to help women, youths, farmers and business people in general to access funding. We have the Women’s Bank, Empower Bank for the youths, Agribank that assist farmers and CBZ for everyone. “We are working with these banks to empower the people. Let’s use those banks to access loans ukuze singahlali sikhala. Gone are the days when business would thrive without proper investment through funding. “Let us borrow money from these institutions,” she said. Dr Ndlovu said women must venture into business so that they become independent. “Gender-based violence is bad and we do not want it. Violence happens a lot to us women because we are too dependent on men. When you venture into business you become financially strong and independent,” she said. The Minister advised women to form groups so that they can build strong businesses that will transform the border town of Plumtree. She commended communities in Bulilima East for good projects and managing to repay their loans. “I expect you to stand up, do a project proposal and ask for money. Other provinces are taking the loans and funding their businesses,” she said. — @themkhust