The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
BUBI Rural District Council chief executive officer, Dr Partson Mlilo has clarified the issue around allegations that he bought himself an official vehicle, a Toyota D4D truck from Umguza Rural District Council without going through tender processes. Chronicle has since established that Bubi RDC gave Dr Mlilo a loan in local currency equivalent to US$12 000 to buy the Toyota D4D. Terms and conditions of the loan are that Mr Mlilo repays the money over a period of three years at an interest rate of 5 percent per annum. According to the Bubi RDC full council minutes of June 26, 2019, councillors resolved that Mr Mlilo should be given the loan to buy the car. The decision was arrived at after the council noted that transport situation was bad as most of their cars were grounded such that they were heavily relying on a single car, a Ford Ranger, which was specifically earmarked for the road fund programme. Dr Mlilo was now using the vehicle as his official car and council felt it compromised service delivery hence the decision to advance him a loan. The council minutes stated that Umguza RDC chief executive officer, Mr Colleen Moyo had offered Mr Mlilo the Toyota D4D at US$12 000 and council felt it could solve his transport problems. “The car could be bought by council or the chief executive officer be given a loan of the same amount to buy the car. It is resolved that the council gives the chief executive officer a loan of equivalent to US$12 000 in RTGS$ at an interest rate of 5 percent per year and repaid over a period of three years,” read the council minutes. In a letter, Bubi RDC executive officer for administration and human resources, a S Dube, also confirmed that the council gave Dr Mlilo a loan to buy the Toyota D4D, which he is using as his personal vehicle. The car does not belong to Bubi RDC. Dr Mlilo accused some individuals of working in cahoots with villagers under the banner “Inyathi Pressure Group” to soil his name. He said the villagers, who live around Inyathi Business Centre are not happy with the expansion of a modern township around the centre as they believe that its development would result in them being displaced. Dr Mlilo is being accused by residents and pressure group of abuse of office. He is denying the allegations, arguing that he was being victimised by the pressure group, which is accusing him of allocating stands to people outside the area. He also accused some residents of financing the pressure group to fight him after council threatened to evict them for erecting “illegal structures” on its land in violation of council by-laws. — @mashnets