The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter
THE Covid-19 induced lockdown in Zimbabwe has resulted in a number of human rights violations especially against vulnerable women and children. Zimbabwe Human Rights Commission (ZHRC) chairperson Commissioner Dr Elasto Mugwadi said the commission received hundreds of complaints from the public on human rights violations in relation to the Covid-19 lockdown. Speaking during the national commemoration of the International Human Rights Day in Bulawayo yesterday, Dr Mugwadi said vulnerable and marginalised groups that include women, children, persons with disabilities, indigenous minorities and older persons, children in childcare homes and prisoners did not fully enjoy their rights. “Not only has the Covid-19 pandemic led to a dramatic negative impact on the right to life, globally, but it has also resulted in unprecedented negative impacts on civil and political rights as well as socio-economic rights including here in Zimbabwe,” said Commissioner Mugwadi. He said through its monitoring work, investigations and awareness outreaches, ZHRC and other stakeholders have noted several negative impacts of Covid-19 on the enjoyment of the right to education. “These impacts include lost learning time, an increase in teen pregnancies owing to the lockdown, an increase in drug and alcohol abuse among school children, an upward trend in cases of violence against children (including domestic and gender-based violence) and corporal punishment in the home, among others,” he added. This year’s commemorations included a quiz competition on human rights issues among 12 secondary schools from Bulawayo province. The best four schools battled it off yesterday and Pumula High School won, walking away with US$900 for their quiz club. On position two was Townsend Girls High School which won US$700, followed by Mandwandwe High School and Eveline High School which won US$500 and US$400 respectively. Commissioner Mugwadi said there was no better social group to assist ZHRC to fulfil its constitutional mandate than children due to their enthusiasm, memory retention and energy. “Children can, therefore, drive positive change in instilling a culture of human rights in our country. As a result, the Commission hopes to continue working with the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education to expand this initiative to schools in all parts of the country, resources permitting,” said the commissioner. Primary and Secondary Education Deputy Minister Edgar Moyo said Government had however tried to avail and promote innovative remote learning so that learners access their right to education. “My Ministry offered radio lessons and will soon offer TV lessons and we also offered online learning platforms as well as hard copy learning materials for remote areas. We are aware, however, that lack of access to radios, television, computers, smartphones, internet and data left the majority of our students in rural areas and other disadvantaged communities unable to engage in remote learning,” said Dep Minister Moyo. He said Government is doing everything possible to ensure that recovery efforts are implemented in line with the phased re-opening of schools and catch-up learning and teaching strategies, capacitation of schools to have electricity as well as internet and radio and TV transmission. “We are now learning the new norm ladies and gentlemen. The negative impact on human rights caused by the lockdown and closure of schools clearly shows that the school is a powerful agent of socialisation and a safety net for children, which is irreplaceable as it cannot be substituted,” he said. Dep Minister Moyo said the ministry will continue with schooling while making every effort to abide by the preventive and containment measures through Standard Operating Procedures for the prevention and management of Covid-19. “We will continue to monitor the situation and make decisions that are in the best interests of the child and that put human rights at the centre of providing a safe and healthy learning and teaching environment for all Zimbabweans,” he said.— @thamamoe