The Chronicle Bulawayo residents should take seriously the Provincial Affairs Minister Cde Judith Ncube’s warning that the city risks being put under stricter Covid-19 lockdown if residents do not change their behaviour. Cde Ncube said if residents continue to flout health measures and regulations meant to curb the spread of the pandemic, she will be left with no option but to recommend that the city be placed under stricter lockdown. Cde Ncube said Bulawayo residents are behaving as if the country is out of the woods as far as the pandemic is concerned. She said residents continue to flout health protocols meant to curb the spread of the virus. “People are partying, drinking in bars until late, moving around without wearing face masks and are also not observing social distancing”, said Minister Ncube. She said people were also gathering in large numbers thereby exposing themselves to the pandemic. Bulawayo is now the country’s Covid-19 epicentre as it is recording the highest number of new cases and has the highest number of active cases in the country. Minister Ncube appealed to Bulawayo residents to be exemplary in observing all health protocols and reverse the prevailing trend. Bulawayo residents should take seriously Cde Ncube’s warning and change their behaviour. We have bars that are fully packed and opening until late. These bars are operating illegally and police should enforce the law by arresting the operators and patrons. These bars are not observing social distancing as they are not limiting numbers of patrons drinking illegally. People continue to hold parties where again health protocols are being flouted. The Christmas festivities start on Christmas Eve on Thursday and unless police step up enforcement, the situation is likely to be out of control during this period. People are used to holding parties during the festivities while for others it is a time for weddings and other family gatherings. It is difficult for people to adjust to the new normal limiting gatherings such as parties and weddings hence the need for the police to assist residents to adjust. Bulawayo risks recording a spike in Covid-19 deaths during and after the Christmas and New Year festivities unless residents change their behaviour now. The second Covid-19 wave is already causing havoc in Europe and America and is threatening to do the same here as evidenced by the sharp increase in new cases. The increase in new cases is attributed to an influx of Zimbabweans working in neighbouring countries such as South Africa and Botswana who are returning home for the festivities.