The Chronicle Australia have dropped opener Joe Burns and recalled David Warner and uncapped batsman Will Pucovski for the final two Tests against India next month. Burns made three single-figure scores in four innings in the first two Tests, as Australia won the series opener and India hit back to take the second. Warner missed both matches with a groin injury while Pucovski, 22, was due to make his debut before suffering a concussion in a warm-up match. The third Test begins on 6 January. Having not scored a domestic fifty this season, Burns was not expected to play in the first Test until the injuries to Warner and Pucovski. The 31-year-old hit an unbeaten 51 in the second innings of the first Test but made scores of eight, nought and four in his other innings — as well as four, nought, nought and one in four warm-up innings. If Australia hand highly rated Pucovski, who averages 247.5 in the Sheffield Shield this season, a debut, Matthew Wade is likely to move back into the middle order from his role as a makeshift opener. Selector Trevor Hohns confirmed Pucovski “has been symptom-free for some time” after suffering a ninth concussion of his career — not all of them cricket-related — on 8 December but he must pass a further test before being cleared to play. Fast-bowling all-rounder Sean Abbott has recovered from a calf strain and has also been recalled to the squad.
Meanwhile, Hobart Hurricanes secured an unlikely one-run victory over Brisbane Heat in the Big Bash League with a direct-hit run-out off the final ball of the game. Chasing 151, the Heat needed two from the last ball, but Colin Ingram’s throw from extra cover ran out Mark Steketee. It looked as though Steketee had forced a super over, but his bat bounced in the air as he dived to make his ground. England batsman Dawid Malan earlier made 39 from 32 balls as the Hurricanes were dismissed for 150 at the Gabba. Malan was bowled by Afghanistan spinner Mujeeb Ur Rahman, who claimed 5-15 — the fourth-best figures in Big Bash history. In reply, the Heat slipped to 8-3 and 66-5, England all-rounder Lewis Gregory the fifth wicket to fall — for a 27-ball 29 — when top-edging a pull to the wicketkeeper. James Bazley dragged the Heat back into the game with an unbeaten 49 from 31 balls but, crucially, he faced only two deliveries in the final over. The Heat needed seven off it, but seamer Scott Boland conceded just three singles and a two. The Hurricanes move third in the table with 15 points, while the Heat are sixth, eight points behind Adelaide Strikers in fourth. Australia squad in full
Tim Paine (c), Sean Abbott, Pat Cummins, Cameron Green, Marcus Harris, Josh Hazlewood, Travis Head, Moises Henriques, Marnus Labuschagne, Nathan Lyon, Michael Neser, James Pattinson, Will Pucovski, Steve Smith, Mitchell Starc, Mitchell Swepson, Matthew Wade, David Warner – BBC Sport