The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter
MORE than 2,2 million households have benefited from the Government’s Intwasa/Pfumvudza Programme set to help farmers yield enough to guarantee food security. Under the Intwasa/Pfumvudza farming concept, that is popularly known as Gatshompo in Matabeleland region, farmers receive inputs which include cowpeas, groundnuts, cotton seed as well as fertiliser and chemicals. In a post-Cabinet briefing yesterday Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa said so far, 2 139 275 households have been trained on climate-proofed Pfumvudza/Intwasa. She added that the Zunde raMambo concept has been revived and inputs are now being distributed to 286 chiefs. Government adopted Intwasa/Pfumvudza to address the problem of low production and productivity which continued to negatively affect food security in Zimbabwe. The concept promotes climate proofing agriculture by adopting conservation farming techniques and it involves the utilisation of small pieces of land and application of the correct agronomic practices for higher returns. Statistics show that more than 8,6 million Zimbabweans are food insecure and the situation has been worsened by the Covid-19 pandemic whose impact disrupted many economic activities. Government says 285 440 hectares of the targeted 290 000 hectares have been registered by 11 829 farmers, and 43 067 hectares have been registered for soya bean out of the targeted 60 000 hectares by 932 farmers. Minister Mutsvangwa announced that Cabinet had resolved to extend closing time for restaurants to 8PM from 6.30PM. “In the tourism sector, the Government notes the need to promote business activities in the sector, especially given the anticipated increase of tourists and returning citizens as the country’s borders reopen. Opening hours of restaurants will therefore be extended from 6.30PM closing time to 8PM closing time,” she said. “Restaurant operators are called upon to strictly observe these hours of operation, ensure Covid-19 prevention protocols and guidelines are observed, which will be strictly enforced. Similarly, those patronising the restaurants should ensure that they adhere to curfew hours.” Cabinet also noted with concern the increase in the number of new cases detected, from 281 recorded in week 46 to 594 in week 47 following the reopening of schools. “In order to control the spread of Covid-19 in schools, the following measures are being implemented: intensification of the supervision and inspection of boarding school facilities and providing potable water to 48 schools in Bulawayo which are in dire need of the essential commodity,” said Minister Mutsvangwa. “We are also strengthening public health response measures in affected schools; supporting all education institutions to fully implement Covid-19 Standard Operating Procedures; and implementing Covid-19 protective and preventive measures in the social spaces beyond school premises.” Minister Mutsvangwa called on media practitioners to be wary of undue alarm and despondency caused by the unco-ordinated reportage witnessed since the reopening of schools. “The media is urged to report responsibly on the situation prevailing in primary and secondary schools and seek information from the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education and Health and Child Care on issues of interest,” she said. Minister Mutsvangwa added that the reopening of the country’s borders had been effected as scheduled and the borders will be continuously monitored to guard against the spread of Covid-19. “On the number of people allowed at gatherings, Cabinet notes that the different numbers specified for various types of gatherings has caused general confusion and violations of restrictions. Accordingly, henceforth, the number of people permitted at any gathering is restricted to 100, irrespective of what the gathering is being convened for.” — @thamamoe