The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Health Reporter MPILO Central Hospital and Tsholotsho District Hospital got a shot in the arm when the Zimbabwe Red Cross Society (ZRCS) handed over a consignment of personal protective equipment (PPE) that will be used to protect health care workers from Covid-19. Both hospitals service members of the public from hard hit areas with statistics showing a sharp increase of new Covid-19 cases in Matabeleland region. The ZRCS donated gloves, infra-red thermometers, N95 masks, leathers boots, hand sanitisers, gloves and surgical masks. As of Saturday, Zimbabwe had recorded 12 151 confirmed cases, including 9 984 recoveries and 318 deaths. The country has a total of 525 active cases and of those 525 are in Bulawayo, 300 in Matabeleland South while 93 are in Matabeleland North province. ZRCS Head of Communications and Corporate Affairs Mr Stambuli Kim said the donation is part of the ZRCS response to Covid-19 aimed at complementing efforts by Government to provide quality health care even during a crisis. “The donation is being facilitated by ZRCS as a result of funding raised through support of the German Government and Novartis, an international pharmaceutical company. We are confident that it will help our public health institutions deliver health care services without the fear of exposing staff and their patients to Covid-19,” said Mr Kim. Mpilo acting chief executive officer Dr Xolani Ndlovu extended his gratitude to ZRCS saying the donation will boost the hospital supplies as they have shortages. “We are grateful for the support and since these are consumables. I am sure that maybe after a month or so we will be in need. We therefore urge the ZRCS to continue chipping in to help us protect our staff and members of the public while we offer health care services,” said Dr Ndlovu. The organization has also donated to the Victoria Chitepo General Hospital (formerly Mutare General Hospital) and Tongogara Refugee Camp in Manicaland province. Tsholotsho District health services administrator Mr Gerald Chandakabata said the donation was timely. ” The PPE will go a long way in motivating our frontline staff to continue serving the public despite the emergence of Covid-19,” said Mr Chandakabata. “This is not the first time the Red Cross has come to us. They are our all-weather friends. They have supported infrastructural development like the sewer system, which they have helped rehabilitate.” @thamamoe