The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
GOVERNMENT in collaboration with the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) and other key stakeholders is working on developing a National Migration Policy document to address challenges associated with irregular migration, border governance and human trafficking. The National Migration Policy is set to address key migration management pillars which include migration governance, labour migration, diaspora engagement, border governance, forced displacement, internal migration and trade. It also seeks to facilitate orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and mobility of people, including through the implementation of planned and well-managed migration policies. Government has so far come up with the Labour Migration and Diaspora policies through the ministries of Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare and Foreign Affairs and International Trade. The two policies are aimed at addressing issues related to irregular labour migration and to protect the interests of the diaspora, while providing the necessary political, social and legal environment to enable the Zimbabwean diaspora, to actively participate in the development of their country, through investments, skills and technology transfer. In a speech read on his behalf by the director for policy planning, monitoring and evaluation in the Ministry of Home Affairs and Cultural Heritage during a workshop on the National Migration Policy in Bulawayo on Wednesday, Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Home Affairs and Cultural Heritage, Mr Aaron Nhepera said the National Migration Policy shall be mainstreamed and implemented in the context of National Development Strategy 1 (NDS1), which already acknowledges the development potential of migration. “The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development recognises migration as a core development consideration — marking the first time that migration is explicitly integrated into the global development agenda. The Ministry has ensured that the National Migration Policy became part of the NDS1 as part of our contribution towards the realisation of vision 2030,” he said. Three other previous workshops were held in Kariba, Bulawayo and Mutare. The workshops largely focused on validating the national situational analysis which allowed Government and co-operating partners to identify eight key thematic areas and eight cross-cutting issues in migration, as guided by the African Union Migration Policy Framework and Plan of Action. “Indeed, the African Union Migration Policy framework and Plan of Action provide the necessary guidance as we craft our own National Migration Policy,” said Mr Nhepera. “Such engagements have also enabled us as Government, to benchmark our migration co-ordination, management, structures and practices and to scrutinise our migration laws and policies, in order to align with regional and international best practices.” IOM chief of mission in Zimbabwe Mr Mario Lito Malanca said Zimbabwe being a source, transit and destination country for migrants also faced increasing challenges related to irregular and mixed migration flows of people from other countries passing though, particularly asylum seekers and refugees. “Effective migration governance has always been essential to promoting the benefits of migration while reducing costs. However, the need for coherent, multidimensional and strategic approaches to migration management is now more urgent than ever,” he said. Mr Malanca said the National Migration Policy, which is currently being finalised, will ensure improved and well-co-ordinated management of migration in the country. He said once it is adopted IOM would support the Government in implementing the policy. “I am also delighted that the National Migration Policy for Zimbabwe is being finalised at a time when Government of Zimbabwe has made a commitment to the fulfilment of the Global Compact on Safe, Regular and Orderly Migration and the SDGs thereby underscoring the importance of a holistic and coherent approach to migration governance in the country,” he said. Mr Malanca said the implementation of the SDGs provides an opportunity to protect and empower mobile populations to fulfil their development potential and benefit individuals, communities and countries around the world. — @mashnets