The Chronicle GOVERNMENT is working on a framework to promote the use and uptake of electric vehicles as Zimbabwe joins the rest of the world in moving away from fossil fuels, a Cabinet Minister has said. Electric vehicles have become a hit in developed countries as they do not use diesel or petrol but are powered by batteries. The models are regarded as environmentally friendly due to their zero air and noise pollution. However, their uptake is still being hampered by concerns over relatively high cost of acquisition with one vehicle costing around US$30 000. Observers have said the prices will result in developing markets taking longer to adopt to electric cars until they are being produced and sold at a relatively lower cost. Zimbabwe is largely flooded by second hand imported vehicles, which cost as low as US$3 000. Energy and Power Development Minister, Zhemu Soda, said the e-mobility framework will outline the facets that will create a conducive environment for the growth of the industry, which include the technical, economic, financial and institutional processes. “The framework shall also be mindful of the supply side of the product which is set to come initially as complementary to the existing industry,” he said, at an event organised by the Zimbabwe Energy Regulatory Authority (Zera) to promote use of electric cars. “No doubt, the technology will disrupt energy related and transport industries but it shall present opportunities to reform the sector to emerge stronger.” Minister Soda said about 30 electric vehicles are being used in the country. To promote their uptake and improve affordability, the framework will include financial measures such as electric vehicle purchase grant scheme, charging support, accelerated capital allowances and duty and taxes relief, measures to facilitate technical support through local manufacturing and assembling of parts and creating local capacity and public awareness strategies of the technology. Zera chief executive, Mr Eddington Mazambani, said promotion of e-vehicles was in line with its mandate to promote and encourage the expansion and the advancement of technology related to petroleum and electricity. “The coming in of this technology therefore marks the beginning of a journey towards efficient management of fuel consumption and clean environment as the market embraces electric vehicles,” he said. – New Ziana.