The Chronicle Business Reporter
THE youth have been called upon to fully participate in farming and position themselves for lucrative food value chain exports to regional and international markets. The country’s trade development and promotion agency, ZimTrade, has emphasised the need to bridge the information gap and educating young farmers on how to grow their businesses for export. The trade agency recently held a dialogue with young farmers to present key opportunities in regional and international export markets. The meeting focused on raising key requirements that will allow young farmers to grow their horticulture production and take advantage of the various export opportunities that are available within the sector. With the support of experts around many areas, discussions also focused on logistics and value chain development as well as certi­fication and standardisation of produce for the export markets. These aspects are normally major barriers for exporters. In its latest monthly newsletter issued yesterday, ZimTrade said the focus of its engagement with young farmers was the need to improve on collaborative work and creating synergies/relationships that will positively impact their supply chains and in turn increase their productivity and exports. The agency encouraged the farmers to consider developing viable value chains by investing in logistical infrastructure, which is key in meeting export standard produce. Heather McSorley, a horticulture expert, hammered on the importance collaborative work for young farmers to grow their businesses. “It is important for young farmers to look into establishing viable relationships not only with buyers but with fellow farmers to be able to meet buyers’ demand,” she said. Young farmers were also encouraged to think big, regardless of the size of land that some may have. Clarence Mwale, a Global Gap certifi­ed expert emphasised that the critical element to consider in export business is not the size of production but the quality of produce. “There is a misconception that in order to export you need to be an established producer, however, it is more important to work on the quality of your produce” said Mwale, adding that “if you are compliant you will easily get certi­fications required to enter the export markets.” The youths are a major demographic that is growing in Africa and it is important that they be considered in taking an active role in growing Zimbabwe’s exports. Most young people are increasingly showing interest and venturing into sectors that perform well on the export market such as agriculture and agro-processing. ZimTrade says there is room to capitalise on this momentum as some of the local youth-led businesses have been performing well on the local market and show potential to take part in the export market. “With the growing demand of super foods and organic produce young farmers have an opportunity to grow their exports with the right knowledge and information,” said the agency.