The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Chronicle Reporter
UMGUZA Rural District Council has been hailed for using its devolution fund allocations from Government to provide services that address problems affecting the people. In line with the Constitution, the devolution agenda is at the heart of Government’s efforts to drive sustainable development across the country. Under this framework Treasury periodically allocates funds to councils to finance development projects at local level.
Some councils have however, been accused of abusing devolution funds meant to fund mainly development projects in their respective areas. Matabeleland North Minister for Provincial Affairs and Devolution Cde Richard Moyo yesterday toured devolution projects undertaken by Umguza Rural District Council. The projects include Heany Junction Clinic in Ward 2 and Bhekeni Clinic in Ward 6 which are both nearing completion. The council has also constructed nurses’ houses and drilled boreholes to ensure safe drinking water for patients and staff at the clinics. The other project council is undertaking is the rehabilitation of the Ntabazinduna sewer reticulation system. The sewer reticulation system will serve an estimated 15 000 villagers, the Ntabazinduna Business Centre, The Zimbabwe Prison and Correctional Services Training Depot, Ntabazinduna Police Training Depot and several schools. Minister Moyo took the opportunity to commission a front-end loader that was bought for ZW$3,7millon using devolution funds. “We toured Heany Junction Clinic in Ward 2 and Bhekeni Clinic in Ward 6. We have other clinics, schools and roads under construction and all these projects are being funded from the devolution funds. I want to express my gratitude to the President for pushing the devolution agenda whose benefits we are now enjoying,” he said. Minister Moyo urged the council to consult stakeholders before embarking on projects so that they have a buy in from the communities. “There are many projects being undertaken in the province by the New Dispensation. This year our target was to complete 40km of the Bulawayo-Nkayi Road but this was affected by Covid-19 outbreak. I hope next year we will cover much ground but the 8km connecting Ingwigwizi Bridge has been done and should be opened for traffic this week. On the Nyamandlovu road we had a target of 20km but we did only 3km so I hope they will recover to meet this year’s target and the one for the coming year,” said Minister Moyo. He said councils have a huge role to play in service delivery so that Government goals are met. “The vision 2030 compels local authorities to put shoulder to the wheel as they work to ensure improved service delivery. Utilisation of devolutions funds must take into consideration community-driven expectations and national aspirations. Therefore, extensive and inclusive consultation should be carried out when coming up with projects to be implemented,” “Let me urge your council to desist from engaging in corruption and abuse of devolution funds. My office will continue to take keen interest in the management and utilisation of such funds.” Minister Moyo said the rehabilitation of the sewer reticulation system in Ntabazinduna which has been down for years will help curb the spread of diseases. He urged the community to preserve investment made by the council as it is meant to serve them. “Investing in equipment for infrastructure development will help reduce costs for equipment hire. This is highly commendable as it shows your commitment to ensure you meet national targets for Infrastructural development which is one of the key anchors in achieving vision 2030,” he said. — @themkhust