The Chronicle Leonard Ncube , Victoria Falls Reporter
ALL is set for today’s Zanu-PF District Co-ordinating Committee (DCC) elections with the ruling party deploying Politburo and senior party members to oversee the election process across the country. The ruling party is reintroducing the DCCs after disbanding them in 2012 when it was felt they had been hijacked by elements that wanted to manipulate the party structures to foment factionalism and disharmony. In Matabeleland North, a total of 336 CVs were submitted for the 161 available positions. There are 191 party districts in the province and each will have a polling station. Provincial leaders from different provinces have been deployed to conduct the elections in other provinces. Politburo member Cde David Parirenyatwa has been deployed to oversee the elections in Matabeleland North where Mashonaland West Province headed by its provincial chairman Cde Ziyambi Ziyambi has been deployed. The Matabeleland North provincial leadership led by its chairman Cde Richard Moyo has been deployed to Masvingo. Cde Moyo said the party is ready to conduct the elections. Voting will start at 8AM while ballot papers were said to be on their way to the province from Harare yesterday. “Everything is in place and we are now ready for the elections on Saturday. Politburo and Central Committee members have been deployed to provinces and for our province Cde Mashonaland West chairman Cde Ziyambi Ziyambi will conduct the elections and reporting to the Politburo member deployed to the province. “Training of retaining officers will take place at the provincial offices in Lupane at 10AM tomorrow after which they will be deployed to polling stations. We have a total of 191 party districts in the province and each will have one station,” said Cde Moyo. Aspiring candidates in Matabeleland North have been literally camped in the districts campaigning in groups showing unity while no notable incidents of violence were reported. A few others have been lone rangers campaigning on their own while social media platforms have bene awash with campaign material as candidates tried to reach to all eligible voters within the party’s structures. Provincial executive members in Matabeleland North have been deployed across the seven districts. Those from Tsholotsho will swop with Umguza team, while Binga will swop with Hwange, Nkayi with Bubi. Those from Lupane East will swop with those from Lupane West. Eighteen candidates are vying for the DCC chair’s position in the seven districts in Matabeleland North where Cdes Thadiuos Mwembe, Vwelenga Mugande, Simon Muleya are vying for the Binga chairmanship while Cdes Abednico Maphosa, Andrew Moyo and Benjamin Ndlovu will be battling it out in Bubi. In Hwange, Cdes Reeds Dube, Mathew Muleya, Jonathan Mathe and John Dix Ncube are vying for the post, with Cdes Permanent Sibanda and Musa Nkala competing in Lupane. Cdes Ntokozo Mlotshwa and Lot Fuzane are vying for the Nkayi DCC chairmanship with Cdes John Vulile Dube and Ronald Tshuma battling it out in Tsholotsho and Cdes Albert Ncube and Paul Mthimkhulu in Umguza. — @ncubeleon