The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau THE police have arrested two more Zimbabwe Revenue Authorities (Zimra) officials deployed to Beitbridge Border Post as the Government intensifies the crack down on rent-seeking activities at the border with South Africa. Nelson Chinguwo and Innocent Sithole, are accused of causing the clandestine release of goods that had been seized for violation of customs laws. The state stood to lose more than $6, 2 million and US$8 000 in import revenue. Under the current customs law goods seized from offenders are kept in a State warehouse for 90 days before being disposed of through an auction in the event the owners fail to settle matters with the revenue collector within that period. Authorities estimate that the country could be losing about US$1 billion in uncollected import duty due to smuggling and other criminal activities along the Limpopo River annually. Last week, senior members of the Joint Operations Command (JOC) led by State Security Minister Owen Ncube, who said the Government was upgrading and tightening screws on criminal activities along the border line with South Africa. Chinguwo and Sithole’s arrest follows that of three others last week, who are accused of facilitating the smuggling of four tankers laden with 176 000 litres of unleaded petrol worth US$85 000 in import duty. The duo who are separately charged for Criminal Abuse of Office, have since appeared before Beitbridge Resident Magistrate, Mr Toyindepi Zhou. Chinguwo who is alleged to have released goods valued at $5, 9 million and US$8 000 was remanded to 24 December on $30 000 bail. Sithole is charged for releasing goods worth $160 000 and was remanded to same date on $20 000 bail. The State led by Mr Ronald Mugwagwa alleges that Zimra seized an assortment of goods at Beitridge Border Post in June this year from various people for violating customs laws. The goods were locked in a State warehouse at Manica Transit Shed. They were subject to release on conditions the owners paid import duty amounting to $6, 2 million and US$8 000. He said between 24 November and 3 December, Chinguwo released part of the goods attracting the import duty of $5, 9 million to their owners, while Sithole released goods worth $160 000. The prosecutor said the matter came to light on 3 December when a senior Zimra official checked records after coming across some of the owners leaving the state warehouse at Manica Transit Shed. He discovered that the duo had tampered with records to cause the release of the said consignment. The matter was reported to the police leading to the arrest of Chinguwo and Sithole. In addition, Zimra seized the intercepted goods again. @tupeyo