The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
ZIMBABWEANS in the diaspora have started responding to the Government’s call for them to actively participate in the country’s economic recovery initiatives and contribute to attainment of an upper-middle income economy by 2030. A South Africa-based couple, Anthony and Zandile Denga have decided to support the agriculture sector and help increase productivity. Through their company, Africa Grain and Seeds Association, the couple recently donated horticulture seed varieties worth R100 000 to smallholder farmers in Matabeleland. The beneficiaries were selected through the Department of Social Welfare in liaison with Agritex. It is understood that the AGS project seeks to capacitate more than 50 000 people in different communities who use rain-fed farming or water harvesting methods to improve agricultural productivity and ensure food security. In a recent interview, Mrs Denga, who was born in Plumtree, said she was inspired by Dr Akinwumi Adesina, the President of the African Development Bank who championed the “Africa’s pathway out of poverty”. “The seeds have a Pan-African vision. Our aim is to create an agriculture network across Africa where these communities can trade and sustain themselves. We believe if we play our small roles in making a change, in the next 10 years, AGS will have empowered more than 100 million people throughout Africa,” she said. AGS founder and chairman, Mr Denga who comes from Murewa, also called on the private sector to join hands and play their part in supporting community projects that change the people’s livelihoods. He said some of the beneficiaries include, polytechnic colleges, universities, secondary schools in Matabeleland North and South province, irrigation projects in Gwanda, Bulilima, Esigodini and Murewa. The seeds, he said, were of South African origin and they guarantee high yields. Mr Denga said the donation was meant to complement Government efforts to boost crop production.