The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
Local Rhumba musicians are stampeding to release new albums ahead of the festive season. A lot of them have already launched their new productions while many others are reportedly busy putting final touches to their albums in Zimbabwean and South African studios. The big question is who will buy all this music as the artistes are serving the same market. It is the norm with Rhumba musicians to try and feed the market for the festive season so that they not only get more sales, but have their music ruling the roost during the Christmas and New Year holidays when people generally have more cash to spend. But 2020 has been a difficult year as some musicians who may have wanted to produce their albums during the course of the year could not do so because of the lockdown. The relaxation of the lockdown rules in South Africa where the majority of the Rhumba musicians are based however, opened floodgates as they “all” seem to have rushed to the studios. Already, more than a dozen of them including Mxolisi “Mr Bones” Ndlovu and Garamtata’s finest; Dubia Masters; Kwenjani Band; Tsheba Boys; Insimbi Zezwhane; Themba Mathe and the Sound Blasters; Tornado Heroes; Amathonga Amahle; Mazamnyama Stars; Dupute Warriors; Madlela Sikhobokobo; Abafundisi Band and Matabeleland Young Brothers have churned out new music. Clement Magwaza, who won a Zimbabwe Music Award this year, had a triple album launch with Prosper Bafana and Samavitsha at the Hilbrow Theatre in South Africa on Saturday. Other musicians such as Ndux Junior, Dumezweni and Themba Mathe are putting final touches to their joint project in South Africa. Though competition is good for the fans, it might result in some of the artistes counting their losses if they fail to realise returns for their productions. It is only musicians who have created a market for themselves and have better marketing strategies who will survive while those aiming for a breakthrough might face hard times. Perhaps realising how flooded the market is during the festive season, Ndolwane Super Sounds Amangwe production leader Charles Ndebele last week announced on his Facebook page that he was giving others a chance this year. “This year I’ll not produce any music, not because I’ve dried up in terms of composing new music, but I’m giving others a chance to produce before I come up with my own project. I’ll start working on my next album early next year,” said Ndebele. Reached for comment, Ndebele said morale is high during the festive season as most people will be looking for something new. Themba “Boyoyo” Mathe’s manager, Davson Dube said the festive season is the only time Rhumba musicians make good money hence the pressure to release. “December is the payday month for most Rhumba musicians. When omalayistha and injiva come back home in their numbers, they buy the latest music to play on the long journey and during their stay home. “So artistes release new music to feed this ready market,” he said. Dube added that there is currently stiff competition among Rhumba musicians as some do not want others to steal the thunder as they fear losing supporters to rival groups. “While competition might be good for the consumers of music, quality is sometimes affected as people just rush to have a new album for the festive season. Most guys do their shows throughout the festive season and the shows do better when one has a new production which they can use to lure patrons to shows,” said Dube. The manager said rhumba fans are also in a tight spot as they cannot afford to buy all the released music, something which ends up promoting piracy. He, however, urged artistes to try and feed fans throughout the year rather than all waiting to flood the market during the festive season. Dube said another way this could be addressed was if the corporate world comes on board to support musicians so that they do not rely on album sales only. 