The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Winners of the recently-held Miss Summer Strides 2020 are formulating mental health awareness programmes so as to educate the local community. The move which is inspired by Miss Summer Strides founder, Sipho Mazibuko – who once battled mental illness is part of initiatives the models are undertaking during their reign. In wide-ranging separate interviews on Monday at a local leisure spot, Celine Sialumba, the reigning Miss Summer Strides said the pageant came as a blessing as she got to know more about mental health problems. “Being part of Miss Summer Strides came as an opportunity for me to advocate for mental health awareness. It was also a chance for me to learn about mental health issues. “As part of our reign, in supporting people with mental health problems, we’re giving them the opportunity to actually achieve something in life by encouraging them to believe in themselves. Enthusiasm is infectious especially when it translates to self-confidence,” said Sialumba. First princess Ellaine “Cocoa” Ncube who is also the reigning Miss Curvy Varsity said as a teenager who is well aware that her peers are the most affected in terms of mental health, she feels she has a mandate to spread the word off the ramp. “Being a 19-year-old and being part of this competition has made me realise the need to support and educate people about mental health. In the build up to the Summer Strides contest, “I printed t-shirts that had messages that gave hope to people with mental health problems. These t-shirts will be used by the Miss Summer Strides models during visits to places such as Ingutsheni hospital. “There are things that need humour and creativity in addressing them to the public, for example mental health problems. In that light, because I am also an actress, I want to use my art by coming up with a play which we will use to educate people about what mental health really is,” said Cocoa, formerly known as Ginger Ellie. Speaking at the meeting, Mazibuko said she decided to work with the models on the mental health campaign as she felt they had a huge role to play in terms of educating the public. “Models are young people and they are in touch with the youth so they can play their part better in creating awareness on issues such as drug abuse and mental health as most of them suffer from mental health problems after drug use. “This can be done mostly by engaging youths at schools and societies as schools are closed,” said Mazibuko. She plans to host a Mr and Miss Mental Health at Ingutsheni Hospital next year with the official resumption of grooming lessons at Strides Modellling Agency on the cards. – @mthabisi_mthire