The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
AFRO-Soul musician, Berita Khumalo has warned people that the second wave of the Covid-19 pandemic that is hitting South Africa is real, sharing news that her husband, Nhlamulo Baloyi has fallen victim. Berita and Baloyi held a small ceremony to solemnise their union this year under strict lockdown regulations. Sharing the sad news on her Instagram fan page, Berita told her nearly 80 000 followers that her husband had tested positive to Covid-19. “Exactly 10 days before 2020 ends, my husband tested positive for Covid-19. Let me tell you something about this man. He is extremely cautious. Well, he has the privilege to work from home and the past few weeks, he took it a step further by staying home at least 90 percent of the time,” wrote Berita. She said it was beyond her how her husband who stayed at home most of the time caught the virus and it missed her. “I on the other hand have been torn. I’ve been partially on the road performing at live events while trying my best to get on and off stage as quickly as possible to avoid catching the Rona. How it skipped me and went straight to my husband who has been chilling at home is beyond me,” said Berita. She said this was a lesson that South Africa and indeed the world was witnessing the second wave of the pandemic. “My point is that Covid-19 second wave is real. We’re currently fighting it. My prayers to anyone who is fighting Covid 19, it’s a really difficult time, but we’ll conquer and we’ll be victorious,” said Berita. Her husband also advised people to be safe this festive season as the virus is real. “Even if you never leave home, the Rona can catch you. Since I caught it, I suspect that the VSOP has got me because this is not the normal one. Thank goodness the office is closed for the Christmas break. I’ll be taking it easy for my family vacation on the 31st. I have less than a week to fully recover and I’ve only been sick since Saturday,” said Nhlamulo who was SA hip hop superstar Kwesta’s manager at one time. — @bonganinkunzi