The Chronicle Business Reporter
ZB FINANCIAL Holdings has channelled more than $4 million this year towards enhancing the country’s efforts in the fight against the deadly Covid-19 pandemic. The company has been actively participating in Covid-19 prevention programmes through coordinating support to health institutions, frontline workers and vulnerable communities. By Sunday, Zimbabwe had 12 325 confirmed Covid-19 cases, including 10 024 recoveries and 320 deaths, according to the Ministry of Health and Child Care. Group chief executive officer, Mr Ron Mutandagayi, said the fight against Covid-19 was everybody’s responsibility. “This year, ZBFH has committed more than ZW$4 million towards the procurement of personal protective equipment (PPE) and other medical requirements, which are used in the Covid-19 fight,” he said in a Press statement on Monday. “We are conscious of the fact that our business exists and thrives from a healthy community. As a corporate, we are investing heavily to promote the health care services for our communities especially on issues related to Covid-19.” The assistance covered procurement of N95 and FFP2 face masks, surgical masks B/50, infrared thermometers, goggle glasses, theatre caps and gowns, surgical gloves, liquid soap and sodium hypochlorite. Public health service facilities such as municipal polyclinics and community institutions benefited. Among them are Plumtree Town Council, Bulawayo City Council, Chinhoyi Town Council and Harare City Council’s Mbare, Epworth, Glenview and Highfield polyclinics. Hospitals that also received assistance from ZBFH, include Harare’s St Anne’s Hospital, Karanda Mission Hospital in Mount Darwin, St Paul’s Musami Mission Hospital of Murehwa, Chinhoyi Provincial Hospital, Hartzell Hospital in Mutare, RCZ Morgenster Mission Hospital in Masvingo and ZAOGA’s Mbuya Dorcas Hospital in Harare. Mr Mutandagayi warned the public against complacency as he urged strict adherence to Covid-19 mitigation protocols. “We feel that our efforts will be in vain if people start relaxing at a time when Zimbabwe and the world at large are facing a second wave of infections, which have been described as deadlier than the first outbreak,” he said. “It is, however, worrying to note the current relaxation among members of the public, with many usually hanging their masks on the neck while others are congregating in large numbers quite oblivious of the dangers of Covid-19.”