The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent THE Gafa as Zimbabwean dancehall musician Winky D is popularly known did the nation on Monday after he was declared as this year’s Best Dancehall Artiste at the African Entertainment Awards United States of America (AEAUSA). Riding high on his recent release Ragga Msambo trilogy, Winky D managed to shun competition from some of the world’s best musicians among them Patoranking, Shatta Wale, Stonebwoy, Samini, Navy Kenzo, Bebe Cool and Prince Bright. AEAUSA is a non-profit organisation established in New Jersey in the USA to support, celebrate and uplift African Entertainment since 2015. The company uses entertainment as a platform to showcase an Africa that is united, self-sufficient, willing and able to evoke social change that matters most in the communities of Africans all over the world. Taking to his social media pages yesterday, Winky D dedicated the award to his fans who have supported him on a career spanning about two decades. He added that the award is a present for the festive season which is happening on a different note this year as it is subdued due to the Covid-19 pandemic. “Allow me to express hearty appreciation to my musical family, the Gafas to whom I dedicate this award. I am forever humbled by the Gafa family’s uncompromising confidence and unwavering commitment to the Vigilance musical journey. Surely, we are stronger together. This is a befitting festive bonus for the trilogy,” said Winky D. Below is a full list of the AEAUSA winners: Best Male Artist: Diamond Platinumz Best Female Artist: Nandy Best Hip Hop/Rap Artist: Elgrande Toto Hottest Group: Sauti Sol Best Collaboration: Beyonce ft Shatta Wale – King Already Best Music Video: Burnaboy – Anybody Entertainer of the Year: Eddy Kenzo Best Dancer/Group: Fire K Stars Best DJ: DJ Sinyorita Best Francophone Artist: Soul Bangs Best Palop Male Artist: Mr Bow Best Palop Female Artist: Yasmine Best New Artist: Laycon Song of the Year: Master KG – Jerusalema Best Upcoming/Local Artist: KG Best Male Artist – Central/ West Africa: Stonebwoy Best Male Artist – East/South/North Africa: Rayvanny Best Female Artist- Central/ West Africa: Yemi Alade Best Female Artist – East/South/North Africa: Zahara Best African Comedian: Eric Omondi Best Gospel Artist: Sinach Best Blogger/ Influencer: The Hot Jem Best Dance Hall Artist: Winky D Best Host TV/ Radio: Douglas Lwanga @mthabisi_mthire.