The Chronicle EcoCash, Zimbabwe’s largest mobile money platform, has been introducing important new features to its services — including a new self-care portal and a vastly expanded global remittance network — in a bid to meet customers’ ever-changing needs. Since its launch nearly 10 years ago, EcoCash has drastically impacted the lives of millions of Zimbabweans, through its innovative, reliable and convenient services, which have been well-received by the market. Recently, following the global outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic this year, EcoCash has moved decisively to automate many of its critical customer support services, by developing self-service platforms that create convenience and improve the customer experience, while curbing the spread of the deadly virus by reducing person-to-person physical contact. “We understand that most of our customers are busy people and have little time to visit our shops. We have therefore developed self-care portals to afford them self-service, from the comfort of their homes or offices, and to reduce the risk of the spread of Covid-19 by minimising personal contact,” said Cassava Smartech Zimbabwe Chief Commercial Officer Mr Givemore Jojo. The pandemic, which broke out late last year, has nearly crippled many economies after governments imposed restrictive national lockdowns in a bid to arrest the spread of the virus. But the restricted movements have had a negative impact on economies, in particular African economies, many of which largely rely on international remittances due to patchy foreign direct investment and overseas development assistance. EcoCash has partnered with more than a dozen international remittance companies from across the world as part of its contribution to the country’s economic development agenda, as well as to reduce poverty levels and support livelihoods. In November alone, EcoCash sealed remittance deals with Small World (USA), Rocket Remit (Australia), Master Remit (Australia), Airtel Uganda, MTN Zambia and Orange Money Botswana. This was in addition to remittance arrangements with firms in the European Union and the United Kingdom. Mr Jojo said the partnerships will result in improved diaspora remittances into the country and boost financial inclusion. “As EcoCash and Cassava Remit our thrust remains to provide convenience to our customers, whether locally or in the diaspora. These (remittance) partnerships have been concluded following gaps that we identified in the different countries where thousands of fellow Zimbabweans have been asking for convenient, 24/7 solutions, for supporting their family and friends back home,” Mr Jojo said. “With a different festive season this year, where travel across borders will be much more subdued than in other years, we expect more Zimbabweans in the diaspora to send money, rather than travel back home in person due to travel restrictions worldwide related to the Covid-19 pandemic. We have thus made it easier for them to send money back home through these partnerships,” said Mr Jojo, adding that there were more partnerships in the pipeline that would be announced soon. In addition to the convenience brought about by the growing remittance partnerships, EcoCash is providing customers with the added convenience of receiving diaspora remittance funds straight into their EcoCash FCA wallets. “Our customers can receive their diaspora remittance funds directly into their FCA accounts and be able to collect guaranteed US dollar cash from any Econet Shop across the country” Mr Jojo said. With a diaspora population thought to be over three million, according to the International Organisation for Migration (IOM), remittances form a key aspect of Zimbabwe’s social and economic livelihood. EcoCash recently launched a loyalty programme — “MyEcocash Rewards” — which rewards customers for using EcoCash and will, in addition, see customers stand a chance to win various prizes, including television sets, groceries, goats, cows and cash. The hugely popular promotion, which is running until February next year, has also been extended to the diaspora remittance community, as EcoCash’s way of sharing the cheer with all its customers during this festive season.