The Chronicle Mehluli Sibanda, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIMBABWEAN bodybuilder Kylie MacDonald has described her experience at the International Federation of Bodybuilding (IFBB) and Fitness Summer Superbodies held in Krugersdorp, South Africa, on Saturday as excellent. MacDonald finished an incredible fourth in the bikini fitness up to 166 centimetres division. Her achievement saw her receiving a certificate and a medal. The 28-year-old did well to make it to the top six in a category, which had a line-up of 15 bodybuilders. It was her first time competing in an IFBB event in South Africa and MacDonald said she was initially nervous after seeing that her fellow competitors were in great shape, but that did not prevent her from doing what she knows best. “I had such a great experience at the IFBB Summer Superbodies. I met so many beautiful, fit and friendly ladies; it was such a pleasure being on stage with such great competition, considering that I’ve never been on stage with such great physiques. I felt a bit intimidated, but that didn’t stop me from doing my best and showing off my hard work,” MacDonald said. The Bulawayo-based bodybuilder is happy with her fourth place finish since she struggled somewhat with her pose on stage because of back pain. MacDonald is keen to get back to the gym and work on her physique. “I’m actually happy with my fourth place position out of 15 amazing ladies. I just found it a bit difficult with my posing due to a bit of back pain, but I will work on that next time. For now I just want to get back at bettering my physique and my posing and hopefully do well next time,” she said. South African, Shinaide van der Nest, won the bikini fitness up to 166cm and went on to bag the bikini fitness overall title when she came up against other division winners. MacDonald’s coach Simon Gama, who travelled with her to South Africa, was excited with her fourth place finish. Gama has been training MacDonald for four months, preparing her for her first and only competition in 2020. “After a long break because of Covid-19, we managed to train for four months after the SRC allowed gyms to reopen. “We managed to prepare for an international competition like the Arnold Classic qualifier,” Gama said. What excites Gama the most is that MacDonald did not get any warm-up event in Zimbabwe to fine tune for the IFBB Summer Superbodies and for her to finish fourth is a wonderful achievement. He feels MacDonald has really improved compared to how she was last year. “For us to finish fourth without even a warm-up show is a great achievement. Kylie proved that with good preparation she can come up with a good result. “She has improved from last year in terms of body conditioning and symmetry. IFBB is the most difficult to compete in; if you manage to finish in the top six, it’s a good result. “We are not resting, we are preparing for the Arnold Classic,’’ said Gama. By finishing in the top six at the IFBB Summer Superbodies, MacDonald has automatically qualified for the Arnold Classic Africa to be held in South Africa in May next year. With Nathan Greenland, the owner of Body Works Gym where MacDonald trains having witnessed her success in South Africa on Saturday, all is pointing to the female bodybuilder taking part in the biggest multi-sport festival on the African continent next year. – @Mdawini_29.