The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
Police in Beitbridge have recovered the body of a suspected border jumper who is believed to have drowned in the Limpopo River while illegally crossing the border between South Africa and Zimbabwe. The unidentified man’s body was found in an advanced stage of decomposition. The Limpopo River and many streams are at flood level with downpours continuing in most parts of Beitbridge district. The local Civil Protection Unit has since issued early warning messages to communities around Shashe, Umzingwane and Limpopo rivers to take precautionary measures against possible flooding. It is understood that the Limpopo River is now flowing at above 6 metres. The police officer commanding Beitbridge District, Chief Superintendent Tichaona Nyongo said the naked body had been taken to Beitbridge District Hospital for a post-mortem. He said it was found trapped some 20 metres from the Limpopo River bed. “The body of the unidentified man was retrieved in an advanced state of decomposition and indications are that he could have drowned while crossing the flooded Limpopo River,” said the senior police officer. He said they were yet to get more reports on other alleged drownings as most information was filtering through the grapevine. He said they were cautiously verifying all the reports. “We have been hearing rumours, but it is very difficult to establish the facts without anyone reporting on the cases or location,” he said. “However, so far we have one case of drowning that occurred at an illegal crossing point near Panda Mine. We have retrieved the body of a man who was spotted trapped between rocks by a villager who was looking for his donkeys along the Limpopo River on December 17”. Cases of drowning are common in Beitbridge during the rainy season. In January this year, two mourners from Mtetengwe area drowned while taking a bath in the flooded Umzingwane River. Late last year, four fishermen drowned in the flooded Zhovhe dam when a boat they were using capsized while they were casting fishing nets. The dam is located 63km west of Beitbridge along Umzingwane River.