The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter VICTORIA Falls resident magistrate Ms Lindiwe Maphosa has issued a warrant of arrest for a 19-year-old Victoria Falls man who is facing charges of defrauding businesses especially tuck shops by allegedly buying goods using fake Ecocash messages. Thabo Sithole of 1176 Chinotimba had been summoned to appear before the courts Thursday morning for plea recording on a fraud case involving $1 340 but he defaulted. The magistrate issued a warrant of arrest after Sithole’s name was called three times with no response. Sithole has another pending case involving $2 765 where he is jointly charged with Tanaka Maramba, also aged 19. The duo allegedly went to a tuck shop last September and using the same modus operandi duped Ms Letwin Tizirayi by misrepresenting that they had transacted using Ecocash and showed her a fake message purporting that they had paid for the goods. On the case in which he is charged alone, Sithole allegedly went to a tuck shop at number 1201 in Chinotimba and ordered a variety of groceries comprising 2kg rice, 2 litres cooking oil, a bar of soap, soft drinks, biscuits and some packets of cigarettes. He allegedly indicated that he would pay using Ecocash and presented a forged Ecocash transaction message purporting that he had paid for the goods. The complainant Ms Fabie Muzore (47) of 4843 Chinotimba did not suspect anything and only handed the goods to Sithole who went away. She reported the matter to the police when she later realised that she had been duped of $1 340. Sithole defaulted plea recording Thursday morning. Prosecutor, Ms Mitchelle Jakasi said Sithole intentionally edited an Ecocash message to fake a transaction. “On the 23rd of October and at around 10am, the accused went to a tuck shop at number 1201 and ordered two packets of cigarettes, 2kg rice, 2 litres cooking oil, a bar of soap, soft drinks and biscuits. The accused edited a fake Ecocash message of $1 340 and produced it to the complainant who gave him the groceries. The accused went away without making a payment,” said Ms Jakasi. The complainant later noticed that she had been duped and reported the matter to the police. Sithole was arrested following investigations. – @ncubeleon