The Chronicle Stephen Mpofu
This festive season as well as countless others before it and many more to come Zimbabweans and other people elsewhere around the globe celebrate God’s SIGNATURE TUNE OF HEAVEN which redeemed humanity from the dirty clutches of the perpetually unrepentant thief, killer and destroyer, the devil. Now, when the Christmas festive season to celebrate the birth of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ is all over and done with, will you (yes, you) raise your arms or break on your knees and say: “Thank you Mighty God for seeing me and my family through the festive season and life before it, sound and strong on our feet.” Or did you (yes, you) cast your loin skins/ madhumbu/ amabhetshu to the winds during the celebrations and now grown from your sick bed, saying: “Had I known does not proceed?” Indeed, some if not many of our people, who allow themselves to be carried away by run-away joy and wantonly violated the Godly rules of good living at all times and our Government’s regulatory measures against the Covid-19 pandemic will no doubt wish they never existed in the first place, thus indirectly blaming God for their creation and existence as a result of the fruits they reaped by defying protective Government measures against the coronavirus as well as by thumbing their noses at God’s 10 commandments that ought to guide humanity through life on earth, thereby positioning us enroute to eternity with our Creator. Coincidentally, something else happened this current festive season to provoke reflections among Zimbabweans in particular about God’s good handiwork that freed us from demonic colonial rule. A Chimurenga songs competition by the Institute of African Knowledge supported by Zimbabwe’s national broadcaster’s Power FM. The Almighty God loved humanity that He gave His only begotten Son so that whoever believes in Him should not perish but have everlasting life. Jesus Christ, God’s love to humanity died on the cross at Calvary to redeem us, human beings, from eternal damnation as a result of sin, and rose again three days later but his spirit continues to reign as the name of Jesus, the name above all names remains the way out of all difficulties in this carnal world. Thus, it is through the grace of God and the love of Jesus that Zimbabweans overcame racist oppressive rule to be where we are today. This, therefore, essentially means Zimbabweans should continue without ceasing to call upon the name of Jesus, the supreme reason for the Christmas festive season, to rescue us from any imponderable hurdles we come across in life at the behest of the devil or by wilfully trusting in ancestral spirits that are demonic vessels of the devil, instead of asking Jesus to lead us out of any and all difficulties. In this regard, Zimbabweans should call upon the name of Jesus to nullify the propensities for tribalism among some of our people as well as the propensity for regionalism because those are destructive values against the unity and love that must prevail across all sections of our society in order for economic, political and social unity to serve as an engine for driving our one people and one nation into a brave new future for all. That unity of purpose is particularly important in the history of our independence, freedom and self-determination when Western Imperialism continues to wield the deadly axe of economic sanctions over our nations head. Which means that if we do not tire in singing the SIGNATURE TUNE OF LIFE, dominion prosperity will vindicate our appreciation for God’s love to us.