The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE football family was yesterday plunged into mourning following the untimely death of former Highlanders and national team midfielder Richard Choruma. He was 42. The affable former roving midfield maestro, who cut his football teeth at Phinda Mzala, breathed his last at Tembisa Hospital in South Africa after suffering from stomach complications and kidney failure, according to his Australia-based brother Warren Wadawu. “He was ill for a while with stomach complications and then suddenly he suffered kidney failure. He was in hospital early in December and was discharged. He was recovering at home but had further complications as his kidneys never recovered,” Wadawu told Chronicle Sport from his base in Australia. Choruma kicked off his Premier Soccer League career in 1998 at Air Zimbabwe Jets where he played alongside Warriors’ legend Benjani Mwaruwari and Lovemore Mapuya. He unceremoniously left the Harare side in 2000 after being denied a clearance by management to join Highlanders.
His wish was realised the following year when he signed for Bosso, which was being coached by the late Briton, Eddie May. “The years I spent at Highlanders were the best ever in my football career and I will forever cherish them. The team was always on top of its game because we had a host of talented players that made playing football easier, while the fans were always amazing. It was therefore not difficult for us to win games and lift trophies, both of which we did on many occasions. I am a highly decorated player today because I played for that great club. “The midfield was always the engine room that drove Highlanders and made us win all those trophies. We were just uncontrollable and no team could stand against us. Eddie May remains my best ever coach. He was a great tactician and motivator and with him, we could beat anyone. He always believed in his players and that made it easier for us to play for him,” Choruma said in one of his many media profiles. The midfield Choruma was referring to was a star-studded one with the likes of Sizabantu Khoza, Alexander Phiri, Johannes Ngodzo, Honour Gombami, Melusi Sibanda and the late Charles Chilufya. Besides the midfield, that intimidating Bosso side had the likes of Tapuwa Kapini, Dazy”Kapenya, Bekithemba Ndlovu, Sautso Phiri, Mkhokheli Dube and Noel Kaseke. They were later joined by Stewart Murisa and Adam “Adamski” Ndlovu in 2002 as Bosso clinched the league title by a massive 20 points. Choruma also played for the Young Warriors under controversial coach Clemence Westerhoff alongside Nqobizitha Ncube, Master Masiku, Khoza, Joel Luphahla, Walter Chuma, Desmond Maringwa and the late Blessing Makunike.
Khoza yesterday said the nation had lost a future administrator. “What a gentleman he was, gone too soon. We played together until he left for Celtic in South Africa. I also met him in 2006 when he was loaned to Pretoria University while I was on trials. After I had impressed the coaches, they asked Choruma what type of a person I was and he spoke highly of me. It’s so sad that the nation has lost such a young football administrator. You will always be missed tshomi yami; it is God’s will, rest in eternal peace,” said Khoza. Dube took to Twitter to mourn Choruma. “Gone too soon my brother, you will be missed Richo. Devastated by your loss, condolences and prayers to the Choruma family,” Dube tweeted soon after hearing the sad news. Former Highlanders’ skipper Kapenya expressed shock at Choruma’s death. “I am still trying to digest this because it’s like I am dreaming,” said Kapenya.