The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
HIGHLANDERS’ supporters’ chapters have expressed shock and sorrow following the passing on of former star midfielder Richard “Dabuka Express” Choruma in South Africa yesterday morning. Choruma (42) died at Tembisa Hospital in Johannesburg from stomach complications and kidney failure. He was rushed to the hospital by former Warriors’ captain Esrom Nyandoro on Christmas Eve after his condition started deteriorating but all efforts to save his life were in vain. His death touched many hearts and yesterday the Victoria Falls, Harare, South Africa and Plumtree Bosso supporters chapters sent their condolences expressing shock and disbelief. Victoria Falls Chapter headed by Morgan “Gazza” Dube said: “It is a sad chapter in the Bosso book to lose such a young servant of Highlanders and football. Richo should have died in a football stadium and not just anywhere. We are still in shock as the Victoria Falls community.” The Harare Chapter chaired by Derrick Gijima said they had hoped Choruma would one day return to Bosso in a different capacity but that dream has now evaporated. “The Highlanders Harare Chapter is deeply saddened by the death of Highlanders legend Richard Choruma, the Dabuka Express. 2020 has not been a kind year but we will always remember the good years silaye. We were hoping one day he would come back and lead Bosso to greater heights in another capacity as he did during his playing days. Kalale ngoxolo our mesmeriser, qhawe lethu, sohlala simkhumbula,” read the Harare supporters chapter’s statement. Their South African counterparts called on the Highlanders family to celebrate Choruma’s life and remember his contribution to the beautiful game. “We are gutted and shocked following the passing on of our legend Richard ‘Dabuka Express’ Choruma. As a chapter we would like to express our heartfelt condolences to his family and friends, the Bosso empire and the football fraternity in Zimbabwe during this sad and difficult time. “Through this pain, let us celebrate and remember his immense contribution to our football landscape. Rest in Peace Dabuka Express,” wrote the chapter chaired by Nodumo Nyathi. The Plumtree chapter chaired by the late former Highlanders chairman James Mangwana Tshuma’s son, Jabulani, said the Plumtree community was badly shaken by the news of Choruma’s demise. “Our deepest condolences to the Choruma family, Highlanders and the football fraternity in Zimbabwe on the sad passing on of Richard Choruma. Rest in peace Dabuka Express, you will be dearly missed.” Mourners are gathered at Number Y7 in Mzilikazi, Bulawayo.