The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
The start of the festive season is all about pomp and fanfare with Christmas carols being sung all over, but this year, that will not be the case. The Bulawayo City Council (BCC) has scrapped the nativity play, Carols by Candlelight and a ceremony that is usually conducted for the lighting of the city’s Christmas lights. Over the years, the nativity play has been held at the Central Park, while Carols by Candlelight were held at the Amphitheatre. But this year, due to the Covid-19 pandemic, the BCC was forced to cancel these events.
Bongiwe Ngwenya, BCC public relations officer said: “In light of Covid-19, the City of Bulawayo decided to shelve the Christmas activities that it does at the end of the year. We’ve taken into consideration that these are public events and we are encouraging people to stay at home, social distance and mask up, particularly during the festive season. “The usual events such as the nativity play at the Central Park and Carols by Candlelight at the Amphitheatre have been shelved this year.” However, according to Ngwenya, all hope is not lost as people are allowed to go for walks in the park and experience the magnificent Christmas lights which have been switched on. “The Christmas lights have been put up at the Centenary and Central Park and members of the public that wish to take walks can do so while taking into consideration the Covid-19 precautions,” said Ngwenya. The Christmas Mall that was usually erected along Jason Moyo Street (between 9th Avenue and Leopold Takawira) in the city centre will not be there. This is a place where children would enjoy their day with fun rides and games, but due to the Covid-19 pandemic, this is not going to happen this year. “The City of Bulawayo would like to advise members of the public that the portion of Jason Moyo Street between 9th Avenue and Leopold Takawira and portion of 8th Avenue between JMN Nkomo Street and Fife Street will not be closed this festive season to accommodate the Christmas Mall due to the Covid-19 pandemic. “Council will, in future, notify the public of any changes pertaining to the events at the Jason Moyo Street Mall, Trade Fair Fun Fairs and Lunar Park in light of the Covid-19 pandemic. Bulawayo City Council would like to apologise for any inconvenience likely to be caused,” said the Bulawayo town clerk, Christopher Dube in a statement last Friday. Reacting to the cancellation of these Christmas events, nine-year-old Nozithelo Moyo who lives in Burnside said she was saddened as she had become a huge fan of the Christmas Mall. “When my parents told me there’d be no riding scooters and bikes in town, I didn’t believe them only to get into town and see that it was true. I’m pained because that had become the highlight of my Christmas holiday,” she said. So far, alcohol imbibers are the only ones who do not seem to be affected by Covid-19 as they keep coming up with ways to entertain themselves. Scores of them were seen wandering the streets this week carrying the special liquid. Some “bars” that are masquerading as restaurants were selling beer in broad daylight with people dancing the hot sun away with ice cold beers in hand. — @mthabisi_mthire.