The Chronicle Langalakhe Mabena
South Africa-based gospel sensation Canaan Nyathi won big at this year’s South African Broadcasting Corporation Crown Gospel Awards (SABCCGA) after his song, Baba Ziveze was adjudged Song of the Year. The awards were broadcast live from Durban on Sunday with some of the visuals pre-recorded. Nyathi who hails from Bulawayo, shrugged off stiff competition from Busi Radebe (Uzuyigcin’ Impilo Yami), Kelly Khumalo featuring Hlengiwe Mhlaba (Esphambanweni), Xolisa Kwinana (Uyasondla), Tshwane Gospel Choir (Imvuselelo) and Vusi Nova featuring Dumi Mkokstad (Yibanathi). His Live DVD recording of Another Level Of Grace was also crowned Best Engineered project courtesy of the DVD’s sound engineer, Aaron Nkosi. Speaking from his base in Johannesburg, Nyathi said he is humbled by the honour. He went on to thank his family and friends for not giving up on him. “I’m delighted for winning the award. It’s honestly a blessing to me and I promise to deliver good music to all my fans. The award is a stepping stone and I now want to go beyond Southern Africa. “My family played a pivotal role in making sure that I didn’t give up on myself along the way while my friends and pastors gave me the courage to continue doing music because they all believed in me,” said Nyathi. He also congratulated Nkosi who engineered his DVD, Grace Upon Grace and described him as a “very humble and hard working man.” Canaan Nyathi was raised in a Christian family and he has managed to make a name for himself in the gospel music industry as he has toured the world, Southern African countries, Mauritius, United Kingdom, among many others. Nyathi has shared stages with Zimbabweans Takesure Zamar Ncube, Zimpraise and Michael Mahendere while in South Africa, he has shared the stage with great gospel musicians Bishop Benjamin Dube, Dr Tumi, Lebo Sekgobela, Pastor Sipho Ngwenya, Ayanda Ntanzi and Lusanda Beja. Recently, the artiste who is also a businessman, committed to assisting gospel artistes in Bulawayo by opening a subsidiary of his Canaan Nyathi Music company in the city as a way of forging relations in spreading the Word of God. The music company premises which he hopes to start constructing in January, will be accessible to local musicians and will help them produce competitive music. Below is the full list of SABC Gospel Awards winners:
Best Newcomer − Bucy Radebe – Spiritual Encounter
Best Gospel Produced Album − Women in Praise Vol. 5 – Neyi Zimu
Best of Africa Gospel − Heal Our Land – Heal Africa
Best Gospel Jazz Song − Agape Love – A2J Family
Best Male Gospel Artist − Sbu Banda
Best Engineer − Aaron Nkosi – Another Level of Grace (Canaan Nyathi)
Best Clap and Tap − Moya Waka – Arising Stars
Best Choir Community Outreach by Artist/Group − Isethembiso Gospel Group
Best Gospel Group − Tshwane Gospel Choir
Best Female Gospel Artist − Puleng March
Best A Capella (Solo/Group) − God’s Grace Ministries – Lord Have Mercy
Best Gospel Classic of All Time − Kwanqab Umusa – Thinah Zungu
Best Collaboration Gospel Song − Heal Our Land – Artist United
Best Worship Song − Abundance of Rain – NCF Music
Best Rap Gospel Rap (Solo/Group) − Rock of All Ages Master – Zinzi Kahnish
Best Gospel DVD − Glory In His Presence – Benjamin Dube
Best Gospel Album − From Glory To Glory – Go Explo
Best Contemporary Song − Wave After Wave – Gospel Goes Classical
Best Traditional Gospel − Modimo Wa Tseba – Godfrey Mahlangu
Best Gospel Music Video − Church Girl – Zinzi Kahnish
Best Gospel Songwriter − Thinah Zungu – Ngaphandle Kokuthi (Spirit Of Praise 7)’
Best iTende − Nzunza Nawe Ungamthatha – Pastor Sebeh
Best Praise Song − Ngozogiya – Obrey M
Best Gospel Amazion (Solo/Group) − Izwi Esathenjiswa Lona – Joyous of God
Best Gospel Radio Show Commercial − Rosisang (Motsweding FM) – Brown Mosiapoa
Best Gospel Community Radio Show − Bokamoso Show (Madibeng FM) – Ernest Sabata Maleleka
Best Gospel Song − Baba Ziveze – Canaan Nyathi
Best Gospel Artist − Dumi Mkokstad
Best Gospel TV Show − Sunday Spirit – Moja Love