The Chronicle Pep Guardiola backed his former assistant manager Mikel Arteta to turn things around at struggling Arsenal.
Arteta won two Premier Leagues, an FA Cup and two League Cup titles as Guardiola’s No 2 at Manchester City but left to become Arsenal boss in December 2019. The Gunners are currently 15th in the Premier League and lie just five points off the relegation zone after losing their last three games, including a limp 2-0 defeat to Tottenham in the north London derby. But City boss Guardiola said Arteta needed time to turn things around at the Emirates and was the right man for the rebuilding job. He said: ‘‘Arsenal doesn’t have a manager to lead this club in the next years better than him. I don’t have to give my support, because he has it and knows he has it. “He is one of the best managers I ever worked with, of course, and seen directly – for his personality, his commitment, his love for his club. Without his love for his club, he still would be here. “I’m pretty sure he will turn it over and do it like everyone expects. Sometimes when a club comes from not a good period, it needs time. I know in this world, (people think) it doesn’t need time. “If I was part of the board at Arsenal, I would not have any doubts about his quality and capacity to put Arsenal in the place that Arsenal deserves to be”. Granit Xhaka was sent off for a petulant grab around the neck of Ashley Westwood, while captain Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang scored his first career own goal in a 1-0 defeat to fellow strugglers Burnley on Monday. Aubameyang has only scored twice in the Premier League this season after signing a lucrative new three-year contract in September, epitomising the club’s goalscoring woes. Arsenal have only scored 10 Premier League goals in 12 matches, their lowest number at this point in a top-flight campaign in 39 years. Arteta’s side host high-flying fourth-placed Southampton on Wednesday evening with the chance to end their five-match winless run in the league. Meanwhile, Tottenham boss Jose Mourinho has questioned Liverpool’s injury concerns before today’s trip to Anfield in the Premier League. Spurs are top of the table, above the defending champions on goal difference. The Portuguese said the Reds’ only “big injury” is Virgil Van Dijk, with no timeframe on the defender’s return following his knee ligament surgery. “Every club has injuries now and again. Liverpool has a big injury, which is Van Dijk,” said Mourinho. “Injuries are normal. James Milner is injured, (Erik) Lamela is injured.” As well as Van Dijk and Milner, Liverpool boss Jurgen Klopp is set to be without Joe Gomez, Diogo Jota, Kostas Tsimikas, Thiago Alcantara and Xherdan Shaqiri against Spurs while Naby Keita and Joel Matip are doubts. Mourinho added: “I think Alisson is not injured. (Trent) Alexander-Arnold is not injured. Matip, I believe that he’s going to play. Fabinho is not injured. (Andrew) Robertson is not injured. (Jordan) Henderson is not injured. (Georginio) Wijnaldum is not injured. (Mohamed) Salah is not injured, (Roberto) Firmino is not injured, (Sadio) Mane is not injured. “Van Dijk is injured and Van Dijk is a very good player of course. But give me Liverpool’s list of injuries and compare that list with what is the best Liverpool team. “I can give you a list of 10 injuries at Tottenham. We have two kids of the Under-16s with injuries, we have two others in the Under-21s and two in the Under-23s, we have Lamela and [Japhet] Tanganga. And here is a list of 10 players. “But is (Hugo) Lloris injured? No. (Toby) Alderweireld injured? No. (Eric) Dier injured? No. (Sergio) Reguilon injured no? Harry Kane injured? No. Son (Heung-min) injured? No. Lucas (Moura) injured? No. So where are the injuries?” – dailymail-BBCSport.