The Chronicle Business Editor
IN a bid to incentivise adoption of digital financial solutions, Stanbic Bank Zimbabwe has resolved to suspend charges for some of its digital banking platforms. Normally consumers are supposed to spend more on data in order to enjoy the convenience of digital banking. In recognition of the escalating data bundles costs among others which are a limiting factor in its digital banking strategy, the Standard Bank Group subsidiary said it would be zero-rating its digital platforms for all customers who are Econet subscribers. The bank’s head of personal and business banking, Mr Patson Mahatchi said the move was meant to cushion customers in line with the institution’s thrust to put the interest of its customers first. “Customer centricity is of utmost importance to our business and in keeping with this key pillar, we have seen it fit to ensure that our customers are able to access essential services on our digital banking platforms at no data costs,” he said. Mr Mahatchi said the ban was now subsidising the internet service. He said the bank was working with other mobile network service providers to make the same service available to Netone and Telecel subscribers. “This move also demonstrates our dedication to becoming a digital bank and how we are focused on ensuring that our customers get the services as conveniently as possible, and we continue to encourage our customers to embrace digital banking platforms,” he said. The platforms that have been zero-rated include Stanbic Bank Zimbabwe website, Stanbic App, Online Banking and the SlydePay app. SlydePay is a technologically advanced application, which allows account holders to pay bills and make in-store purchases on their phone using QR code scanning technology. Launched in July this year, the App uses the wallet technology to connect one’s bank account to the payment platform, allowing customers to click on an already listed biller and instantly process payments in real time. This move by Stanbic Bank comes as the institution is celebrating multiple awards of being. “The Best Bank in Zimbabwe” by The Banker and by Europe, Middle East and Africa Finance. Both are reputable global institutions who recognise top banks in Africa and Worldwide respectively. Stanbic Bank has been commended for its innovative approach to operations and products especially under the difficult operating environment brought about by the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic.