The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter THIRTY-FIVE percent of Zimbabwean females between the ages of 15 and 49 have experienced physical and sexual violence at least once since they were 15 years old, a top United Nations official has said. Speaking during discussions about the economic cost of mental health and gender-based violence at the ongoing 6th session of the Africa Regional Forum on Sustainable Development (AFRFSD) here, country representative of Zimbabwe United Nations Women, Ms Daphney Serumaga called for social behaviour adjustment. She and other panelists concurred on the need for investment in research on gender-based violence and workplace harassment to raise awareness and create a conducive environment for women to participate in sustainable development. “Data collected in Zimbabwe shows that intimate partner violence among those aged between 15 and 49 is the most prevalent form of violence experienced. Thirty-five percent of girls and women aged 15-49 have experienced physical violence since the age of 15. Fourteen percent of girls and women have experienced sexual violence at least once in their lifetime and 32 percent of  married women have experienced spousal emotional violence. “Six percent of women who have been pregnant have reported that they have experienced violence during one or more of their pregnancies which in turn affects their health and that of the unborn child. Also, 43 percent of girls between 13 and 17 years reported that their first incident of sexual intercourse was unwanted,” said Ms Serumaga. She said gender-based violence causes mental illness and negatively impacts on the economy. “The way we respond and set structures is questionable because it doesn’t seem like we are managing. It’s really about Government investing and individuals being more aware of their situation and understanding that it’s not normal to go through violence,” said Mrs Serumaga. She said while Zimbabwe may not be as bad as other countries, one violation is not right to the society. “Social behaviour adjustment is key so violence doesn’t become a perpetual situation and generational as people believe in institutionalisation than dealing with issues at home. Mental health is part of GBV but we are not sure of impact because we don’t talk about it hence Government and the community need to get involved through research,” she said. International Labour Office country director for Zimbabwe and Namibia Ms Hoplong Phororo called for research on workplace harassment.  — @ncubeleon