The Chronicle Midlands Bureau Chief GOVERNMENT has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Midlands State University (MSU) which will see the institution training civil servants on skills related to the devolution thrust in the Midlands province. The MoU, which is set to transform Government operations in the implementation of the devolution agenda being spearheaded by President Mnangagwa, was signed by Midlands’ Provincial Affairs Minister, Larry Mavima and MSU Vice-Chancellor, Professor Victor Muzvidziwa, on Thursday. The MoU strengthens the existing relationship between the university and Government. It will see the institution of higher learning enhancing productivity and value addition in all sectors of the economy. The signing ceremony took place at the MSU Main Campus in Gweru and was witnessed by senior Government officials and authorities at MSU. In his address, Minister Mavima said the Second Republic was committed to implementing the devolution agenda and the development is a milestone. “Indeed, the university needs to make huge positive differences in addressing community developmental challenges which form the basis of the existence of all arms of Government. Ladies and gentlemen, in view of devolution agenda, whose major thrust is economic growth, MSU needs to collaborate with Government to enhance implementation capacity,” he said. Professor Muzvidziwa said MSU is committed to assisting Government in its vision of having an upper-middle-income economy by 2030. He said devolution was the way to go in achieving that economic status. “In this collaborative partnership, MSU will assist with the expertise required for different provincial socio-economic development projects drawn from the different faculties, work closely with partners identified by the Minister in achieving the parties’ mutual goals in different initiatives and work with other partners in identifying and developing novel projects in the province,” he said. Meanwhile, the MSU in collaboration with urban authorities is also undertaking research aimed at creating urban profiles for Zimbabwean towns and cities. As part of the research project, the university hosted a Research Introductory Meeting recently which was largely centred on urban planning, development and management of cities and towns in Zimbabwe. MSU Department of Local Governance Studies chairperson and lecturer, Mrs Virginia Makanza, said the main aim of the meeting was to develop urban profiles for Zimbabwean towns and cities. “The idea behind the research is the development of urban profiles for Zimbabwean cities and towns by taking a look at issues concerned with the process and system of urbanisation, development, planning and management,” said Mrs Makanza. While Zvishavane Town Council is the first urban authority to come on board, the research is expected to see more towns and cities joining the collaboration.