The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief RURAL and urban communities in the Midlands province have started to benefit from the Government’s devolution programmes since the release of more than $60 million to local authorities by Government. The amount is more than double what was released for devolution projects in the province last November. All the 14 local authorities in the province have received the money which is meant to fund projects to improve the people’s welfare. Midlands Provincial Affairs Minister Larry Mavima who is touring devolution projects in the province, said it is the wish of the Second Republic to improve the livelihoods of marginalised communities. He has so far been to Chirumhanzu RDC, Mvuma, Mberengwa RDC, Zvishavane town and Runde RDC, Shurugwi town and said he was impressed by the progress made in funding community projects. Minister Mavima said projects being funded included among others road construction, building or upgrading health facilities, construction of classrooms and drilling boreholes or sinking wells. “We have been given a huge task by President Mnangagwa to transform the lives of our people. “We are targeting the remote areas to ensure that our people get services they don’t usually get. People should be able to get water, electricity and access health care facilities. “This is in line with the Government’s vision of an upper-middle-income economy by 2030. Together we can achieve this vision,” said Minister Mavima. In Chirumanzu Ward six council is constructing Hwata Clinic using devolution money. This development is expected to improve health services delivery in the area where villagers are walking close to 20 kilometres to access the nearest health care facility. The state-of-the-art clinic which is 70 percent complete, will have two staff houses, an outpatient consultation room, maternity ward, male and female as well as juvenile wards. “If you go to these local authorities, they have identified water related projects as they have been facing problems in that area. We are happy with the results so far. “This is exactly what Government had in mind when they came up with the devolution idea. Runde RDC has started the construction of a 7,9km water pipeline to service two secondary and three primary schools. Communities along the pipeline will also benefit,” said Minister Mavima. He said Zvishavane Town council was rehabilitating the Mabula Sewer Ponds as well as resuscitating the Runde Water Plant using the devolution funds. He said the projects will be commissioned at the end of March. “In Shurugwi, there are clinics that are being constructed as well as a water treatment plant,” said Minister Mavima. He said Mberengwa Rural District Council bought equipment for road construction. “The funds from Government should be used to create investment opportunities in the districts. We want life changing programmes to be implemented in the communities,” said Minister Mavima.