The Chronicle Tadious Manyepo, Harare Bureau ZIFA have secured a work permit for new Warriors coach, Zdravko “Loga’’ Logarusic. The association said the work permit was secured on Monday and Loga is now expected in the country next week to start working on his new project. The Croat was a surprise pick for the Warriors job but he insists he will prove a few doubters wrong. His Balkan counterpart, Milutin “Micho” Sredojevic, has also been appointed coach of the Zambian national football team. The Serb has already started working and has selected a pool of 64 local players from both the country’s top-flight and lower division teams. The players are expected to go into camp in Ndola next Monday, the same day Loga is expected to arrive in Harare. Zifa spokesperson, Xolisani Gwesela, yesterday confirmed Loga’s work permit was now ready. “The coach will arrive in the country very soon, probably next week. His work permit is ready so we are now awaiting his arrival,” said Gwesela. With local players in Zimbabwe only starting their pre-season preparations, and with the domestic Premiership, starting at around the same time the Warriors take on Algeria, Loga is likely to be forced to overlook them. Loga, though, is likely to be spoilt for choice, with an increasing number of Zimbabwean players dotted around Europe expressing interest in playing for the Warriors. Goalkeeper Martin Mapisa, who recently moved to promotion-eyeing Zamora FC from Velez CF in Spain, has been doing well with a number of top clubs, including those in the Spanish La Liga, monitoring him. Four of the Warrriors play in Euro top-tier leagues with Aston Villa’s midfielder Marvelous Nakamba leading that elite quartet. Marshal Munetsi, who plays for French Ligue 1 side Stede Reims, defender Teenage Hadebe, who turns out for Malatyaspor in the Turkish Super League, are also available. Captain Knowledge Musona is back in action at Eupen in the Belgian top-flight on loan from Anderlecht and Alec Mudimu has just joined FC Sheriff in Moldova from Walesh side CFN Druids. On-song Tino Kadewere, who is now on loan at French Ligue 2 side Le Havre from top-tier giants Olympic Lyon, should be a sure bet for Loga. Just recently Charlton Athletic striker, McCauley Bonne, revealed he was ready for his Warriors bow after getting his Zimbabwean passport. Jordan Zemura, who plays for Bournemouth reserves in England, Reading’s Andy Rinomhota, the pair of Adam Chicksen and David Moyo, who are in the Scottish top-flight league, are also fighting for recognition. SV Hamburg’s Jonah Fabisch and Admiral Muskwe, who has just joined Swindon Town from Leicester, are among a host of other lower division players from Europe who are available for selection into the team. UK-based Zimbabwean coach, Philip Zulu, yesterday said Loga shouldn’t overrate Algeria as the Warriors have an array of their own superstars at their disposal. “Let’s go for broke against Algeria, as they’ll bring all their Europe-based players for a showdown,’’ said Zulu. ‘’It’s a game of nerves and quality on the pitch as well, they’re serious about going far and this should be a huge test to our aspirations of squaring toe-to-toe with the big teams of North Africa. “This game is a must-win for Zimbabwe at all costs, we will then send a clear message loudly to Ghana, and all the teams in the World Cup qualification group with us.’’ Zulu also talked about his fantasy Warriors team. “We could throw in Martin Mapisa as a goalkeeper, Jordan Zemura at right back, Adam Chicksen as a left wing back and, if the gods are on our side, Andy Rinemhota in midfield with Nakamba,’’ he said. “Then, up front, we will have Bonne and Kadewere, with Khama Billiat playing behind the two strikers and Musona on the right side of midfield. “Our central defenders should be Hadebe and Munetsi. That squad will threaten every team out there. “If Andy Rinemhota fails to come, (we should) throw in Jonah Fabisch to partner Nakamba in midfield. David Moyo can start from the bench.’’