The Chronicle Lenox Lizwi Mhlanga on Saturday It doesn’t take rocket scientists to tell you that these are the last days. The days of famine, disease and pestilence that the Book of Revelations so graphically describes, much to our trepidation, have finally arrived. The dreaded coronavirus, dubbed Covid-19, as if that would make it sound any better, has the potential of decimating the globe. But like any epidemic, the greatest enemy is ignorance. And ignorance begets rumour, misinformation and the spread of fear. The coronavirus has infected tens of thousands in China and it continues to spread to other countries. Oddly enough, the epidemic has given Africa, with its rickety health care systems a wide berth, at least for now. Healthcare organisations marshalled by the World Health Organisation (WHO), are working hard to treat patients, learn about the virus, find a cure and quickly disseminate accurate information. While you and I twiddle our thumbs wondering where and when it would hit next, brands and organisations across the globe are preparing themselves to tackle a crisis of epic proportions. No doubt when the disease hits the deep pockets of blue chip corporates, everyone has to sit up and pay attention. In my other life as a corporate communications strategist, I worry about the communication deficiencies one observes when such calamities strike closer to home. It is not so much about getting all the best hands and equipment on deck, but rather how we communicate about the disease and its effects to the general populace. It is quite obvious that in such a situation, we cannot rely on the Government alone to build lines of defence that would act as a buffer against the worst excesses of Covid-19. All organisations have a responsibility to lend a hand, better still when they are in the business of providing essential goods and services that could be deployed against the epidemic. Firstly, Government, which by now must be receiving essential assistance from institutions such as WHO, must assume leadership of a unified response against Covid-19. One would say it is through God’s providence that the continent has not borne the brunt of the outbreak as yet. The authorities should take advantage of this window of opportunity to be proactive and mobilise resources and partners to tackle the outbreak should it hit our shores with a vengeance. PR executives surveyed by the online magazine, Campaign, emphasise the need for frequent, transparent and accurate communications. “We have to keep the messages simple and factual to avoid any unnecessary panic, and reference only information from government or health organisations,” they implore. This should make sense due to the manner in which social media has seized the high ground spreading false narratives around the outbreak at a time when we need the assurance of hard facts around the disease so we all make informed decisions. Social media has drastically increased the speed that a crisis can develop and spread. News and accusations can quickly “go viral” through multiple social media channels. Slow or inappropriate responses during a fast-moving crisis can cause severe reputational damage. They also advise that we be informed and also be ready to act swiftly by continuously monitoring the media and regularly engage with internal and external stakeholders to stay abreast of the situation. In our profession, having or assembling a preliminary crisis plan based on recommendations of public health organisations in anticipation that the spread of the disease reaches any part of your organisation is very important. Brands should emphasise employee safety. By placing a priority on the wellbeing of employees in a crisis such as this one, reflects the organisation as considerate and compassionate to its workers. Keeping tabs on employee travel plans and considering to allow remote or telecommuting work arrangements is a great idea. In the affected countries, technology has come to the rescue as companies and schools conduct business online with employees and students not moving an inch from their homes. This has contributed greatly to the containment of the virus. Like we indicated earlier, an increase in corporate social responsibility (CSR) activities by contributing to social causes is a duty all corporates should embark on. Many commendably reacted with admiration to the cyclone that hit part of the country last year. Those brands that are able, should donate to organised and reliable entities where their efforts will not find their way into some undeserving pockets. More importantly, we all have a duty to counter misinformation and fake news. “We are in an era of information overload and fake news, which makes it all the more important for (government and other institutions) to position themselves as credible sources of information that people can rely on,” says Antoine Calendrier, Head of reputation, North Asia, Edelman Asia Pacific We can draw lessons from the Ebola outbreak in 2014, says Daniel Keeney, founder and president of DPK Public Relations. This will help making the same healthcare management and communications mistakes committed then from being repeated in the coronavirus situation. In his wisdom, Keeney offers these recommendations: Know the facts before you speak. One of my teachers used to implore us to engage our brains before we spoke. In this case, get your facts right first before you go viral. “Early in both the Ebola and coronavirus outbreaks, health experts knew very little about the disease and how they spread. As the coronavirus started spreading, political leaders, including Washington Governor Jay Inslee and President Trump, issued unrealistically positive public statements,” Keeney observes. Information should be from reliable sources, finish and klaar! Don’t be pressured into releasing information. The media’s appetite for information is well known. Journalists put pressure on authorities to release information even when it is half baked. The focus should be on responding to and correcting inaccurate statements on Twitter and other social channels rather than worrying if journalists feel ignored. Communicating is critical but is no substitute for training. I was pleasantly surprised when I saw top local health personnel engaging in training on how to handle the outbreak at a local hotel. I am told that the training was to be cascaded to lower level health workers in preparation from a possible outbreak. Even our ports of entry now inspire confidence as the first line of defence with the degree of vigilance there. Businesses, too, must offer training to employees in risk prevention, including frequent and thorough hand-washing. It also helps prevent the common flu. Keeney says that the coronavirus has become both a public health and a PR issue. He says that businesses and organisations in a range of affected industries should follow the recommendations of public health organisations to provide timely and accurate information, dispel misinformation, protect their employees, and make thoughtful business decisions to prevent further spread of the illness.