The Chronicle Harare Bureau FUEL supplies were improving yesterday as more service stations received deliveries or were told they were scheduled for a delivery very soon after the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe released foreign funds to enable oil companies to access fuel stocks that were already in the country, but needed payment to be released. In Harare service stations started the day dry, with the minority that had received fuel over the lst few days sold out, but deliveries were being made during the day and motorists were queuing from early morning at those stations that were expecting a delivery. Most DFI service stations around the city had fuel throughout the day. In Matabeleland South some motorists in Plumtree were crossing the border into Botswana to get supplies for resale in the town at a significant mark-up. In Gwanda two of the four services stations had fuel while in Beitbridge more than half of the 10 service stations received limited supplies although some people were still crossing into South Africa. The three service stations authorised to sell fuel in forex in the town had supplies. In Mutare Total, Zuva and Petrotrade service stations received fuel on Thursday and yesterday but deliveries were quickly sold out as demand was very high following the recent tight supplies. The situation was the same in the Midlands where a few service stations received fuel, while some motorists were travelling to Chachacha Business Centre in Shurugwi rural to get fuel at a service station that sells fuel in foreign currency. In Masvingo fuel deliveries had improved although most services station had long winding queues. But Engen, Exor, Total and Zuva garages had received petrol. A fuel attendant at one of Zuva service stations in the city said they were expecting to get diesel by end of day yesterday. “All the cars that are queuing here will get fuel as there are adequate supplies. For diesel, we are waiting for delivery later in the day and we want to assure motorists that it’s coming,” he said. Some service stations in Mashonaland West started receiving fuel yesterday, easing the pressure on the few that had petrol and diesel over the last few days. In Chinhoyi, fuel was available at Engen D and R and also at Petrotrade resulting in queues becoming shorter. The situation was the same in Chegutu at service stations such as Tingle where there were no queues.