The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau THE Environmental Management Agency (EMA) has said environmental violations in the country have reached unprecedented levels. The organisation said it is collaborating with other law enforcement agents to fight cases of land degradation, especially in the mining sector. In a statement yesterday, the manager responsible for environmental education and education, Ms Amkela Sidange, said over the years, both in urban and rural areas, many people have been turning to the environment for survival. She said in many cases the scramble for opportunities was leading to the mismanagement of the environment subsequently resulting in the rise in environmental law violations. Ms Sidange said environmental violations have reached unprecedented levels. She said in the last two weeks, EMA conducted 659 inspections in mining areas in the Midlands Province where it turned out that a total of 383 hectares of land had been degraded. “Among these several environmental violations is land degradation from chrome mining activities. In the last two weeks with the assistance of the Zimbabwe Republic Police (ZRP), we descended on the chrome mining activities in the Midlands Province to address land degradation from such mining activities along the Great Dyke,” Ms Sidange said. “The operation covered high chrome mining districts in the province such as Kwekwe, Chirumanzu, Shurugwi, Zvishavane, and Mberengwa. Our main objective was to establish the extent of land degradation as a result of chrome mining in these areas and the needs in terms of rehabilitation of mined areas”. She said during the operation they also conducted general environmental monitoring and compliance inspections, responded to environmental complaints submitted by the public and initiated prosecution of those found violating environmental law. Ms Sidange said they had issued 24 Environmental Protection Orders some compelling offenders to among other things, rehabilitate degraded areas, compile EIA for their projects and cease operations pending compliance with stipulated conditions in the order. “In the process, 56 tickets were issued to those found violating the law with fines ranging between level 8 ($3 600) and 14 ($30 000). Failure to either comply with the orders or to pay for tickets will result in the opening of dockets and prison sentences,” she said. “However, it was also established during the same operation that a total of 83.75 hectares of previously degraded land was rehabilitated most by backfilling and as EMA we want to commend this as one of the best sustainable environmental practices and thus encourage all miners to rehabilitate land after mining.” Ms Sidange said it was critical for miners to formalise their activities with the agency by compiling the EIA so that they are issued with EIA certificates. On the same note, she said, project developers should ensure they implement their projects in compliance with the conditions of their EIA certification and always backfill after mining to restore the land to its previous state and productivity. Ms Sidange said the National Environmental Law Enforcement Unit will remain vigilant on the ground to prosecute all those found to be violating any environmental laws of the country. “Going forward, similar operations are ongoing across the whole country to address any environmental violations. The Agency wants to impress on the citizenry of this country to value its natural capital and guard it judiciously through sustainable management of all natural resources,” she said.