The Chronicle Prosper Ndlovu in MAUN, Botswana BOTSWANA has applauded Zimbabwe’s role in fostering peace and security within the Southern African Development Community (SADC) saying this is a critical ingredient for sustainable development within the region. President Mnangagwa is the current chairman of the Organ for Politics, Defence and Security, which was launched in June 1996 as a formal institution of Sadc. The organ is mandated to support the achievement and maintenance of security and the rule of law in the Sadc region and its activities are guided by the Sadc Treaty, the Protocol on Defence and Security Affairs as well as the Strategic Indicative Plan for the Organ (SIPO), as key policy documents In her opening remarks during the Ministerial Session at the on-going 2nd Session of the Botswana-Zimbabwe Bi-National Commission (BNC) here yesterday, the neighbouring country’s Minister of International Affairs and Co-operation, Dr Unity Dow, said Zimbabwe has done well in seeking increased regional co-operation, which is important in the quest to achieve meaningful economic growth among Sadc countries. “I wish to take this opportunity to commend your country (Zimbabwe) for doing a sterling job as the chair of the Sadc Organ on Politics, Defence and Security,” she said. “We acknowledge that since assuming this role, you have been busy as the head of the Sadc Election Observer Missions (SEOMs), observing elections in Mozambique, Botswana, Mauritius and Namibia. “We will definitely tap into your experience and wise counsel when we assume the chair in August this year.” Botswana is the incoming chair of the Organ. Beyond the cordial bilateral relations and mutual co-operation, the Dr Dow said Botswana and Zimbabwe continue to work together to advance common interests and values at the regional, continental and multi-lateral platforms, including at the SADC level. “This co-operation is crucial in our efforts to address challenges that impede economic growth as well as peace and stability in the region and the continent at large,” she said. Dr Dow expressed optimism that the mutual co-operation between Botswana and Zimbabwe would find true expression in promoting an environment of sustained democracy, rule of law, good governance and vibrant economic progress. In his response, Foreign Affairs and International Trade Minister, Dr Sibusiso Moyo, also paid tribute to Botswana for its support as the vice chair of the SADC Organ on Politics, Defense and Security. “When you assume the chairmanship in August this year, I assure you that our support will be likewise, unflinching,” he said. Dr Moyo also extended deep appreciation to Botswana as well as other SADC countries for the resolute and principled stance taken in calling for the removal of the illegal sanctions imposed on Zimbabwe and the historic decision taken to declare 25 October, Anti-Sanctions Day.