The Chronicle Nomvelo Siziba, Chronicle Reporter THE Hwange Local Board (HLB) has suspended its finance director Mr Innocent Tshuma and administrator Mr Mhlupheki Mlilo over allegations of abuse of funds and awarding tenders without council approval. Mr Tshuma was suspended last month while Mr Mlilo was suspended a fortnight ago. Allegations are that Mr Tshuma abused council funds running into tens of thousands of dollars. It also emerged the local authority last carried out an audit about six years ago. Mr Mlilo allegedly caused council to buy meat from Mr Tshuma’s butchery fully knowing the latter was already on suspension. Mr Tshuma and Mr Mlilo are expected to appear before a disciplinary hearing. HLB Town Secretary Mr Ndumiso Mdlalose confirmed the suspensions but could not shed more light saying the matter was still under investigation. Council chairperson Councillor Nqobile Mabhena said an independent disciplinary panel was handling the issue. “There are two members of the Local Board who have been suspended from their duties because of some allegations. “The finance director allegedly failed to have books audited since 2014 while the administrator contravened procurement regulations. I can’t say much at the moment,” said Clr Mabhena. He said the council will be convening a special council meeting over the issue. Mr Mlilo declined to comment saying his suspension was an internal matter. “I don’t know what I am being accused of. I thought this was an inside thing and I cannot comment,” he said. Mr Tshuma could not be reached for a comment as his mobile continuously rang without being picked. Greater Hwange Residence Trust chairperson Mr Lucky Daka appealed to Government to investigate the HLB for alleged corruption. “A lot of corruption is happening within the local board and sadly it’s the ratepayers that are made to pay the costs,” said Mr Daka. He implored Government to monitor local authorities. HLB two years ago applied for town status which if granted would lead to incorporation of the local authority with concession areas currently administered by Hwange Colliery, National Railways of Zimbabwe and Zimbabwe Power Company. — @nomvelosiziba.