The Chronicle WE applaud the camaraderie and spirit with which a meeting between President Mnangagwa and civil society groups from Matabeleland was conducted at State House in Bulawayo last Friday. The indaba, a follow up to the inaugural meeting between the President and members of the Matabeleland Collective in March last year, offered the parties an opportunity to address critical issues affecting the people of this region – from development to reconciliation and inclusivity. We also note that the engagement was expanded to accommodate organisations outside the ambit of the Matabeleland Collective – giving a wider voice to the region and strengthening dialogue between the Government and the civic society. Held in an open and informal setting, the meeting was characterised by a candid and robust exchange of views with the President giving the various organisations an opportunity to air their views on various issues such as Gukurahundi. True to his nature as a listening leader, President Mnangagwa listened attentively to submissions by speakers on issues including suggestions on how to find closure on Gukurahundi – a sensitive and emotive matter which the Government is addressing though the National Peace and Reconciliation Commission chaired by Retired Justice Selo Nare. He praised the individuals for speaking from their hearts on issues of Gukurahundi saying the approach will lead to a consensus in finding lasting solutions on the way forward. “My Government is committed to promoting the spirit of co-operation and dialogue among all Zimbabweans where dialogue totally eclipses confrontation as a method of choice in resolving thorny issues that may rise or have risen in our society. “Allow me therefore, to proffer a few words of advice in view of the issues that have been raised by the Matabeleland Civic Society which are of such sensitivity and pain and are always going to raise sharp differences and emotions in any discussion to resolve them. However, we must resist the urge to elevate any differences that arise out of discussions aimed at resolving the issues of Matabeleland to a level where they become permanent barriers that prevent meaningful dialogue amongst us,” said President Mnangagwa. He said his door remains open to everyone even those who didn’t attend Friday’s meeting on issues that affect the region. “Let me assure you that, as I have demonstrated by convening this meeting today, I shall continue to monitor this dialogue very closely and hold all my officials accountable for the successful implementation of issues discussed here. I reiterate that, as Zimbabweans we are one. Together we can overcome any challenges that confront us,” said Cde Mnangagwa. We welcome the success of the second engagement between the President and civic groups from the region and hope it will lay a solid foundation for the resolution of some of the issues affecting the people of Matabeleland. Never before has a President found time to interact in an open forum with citizens as was done by Cde Mnangagwa on Friday and we commend him for that. Such candid discussions around sensitive issues like Gukurahundi are encouraged as they dispel the myth that Government is not doing anything to bring closure to the matter. In this regard, we are pleased with the progress made by the NPRC in seeking to bring finality to the Gukurahundi issue. While Government is working on achieving consensus on how best to address the exhumations and reburials of victims of the post-independence disturbances, the NPRC has made tremendous progress in making sure families and those affected by Gukurahundi find healing. President Mnangagwa has pledged to ensure the capacitation of the Government with resources for exhumation and reburials for Gukurahundi victims, the documentation exercise of Gukurahundi victims without identity particulars, provision of medical services to victims and holding of public meetings. On its part, the NPRC has been meeting with affected villagers and community leaders such as chiefs to deliberate on the best way to conduct the exhumations and reburials. At Friday’s meeting at State House, the President took time to respond to issues raised by various speakers and was frank and forthright in reiterating Government’s sincerity to addressing the Gukurahundi issue. “You are wondering whether this Government is sincere, if I ask are you sincere, what would you say? And I believe what you were saying is sincere from your point of view, I also believe that you should believe me that after 39 years of silence I say let’s talk about this thing and you doubt my sincerity. I don’t know what you would want to see,” he said in response to a question from one of the participants. While we welcome discussions around subjects such as Gukurahundi, we are alive to the fact that there is a need to ensure that the debate does not degenerate into a witch-hunt because at the end of the day Zimbabwe needs to heal and move forward. As a nation, we cannot afford to live in the past but the best we can do is to learn from our mistakes with the hope that they will never be repeated.