The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent A MAN from Mberengwa and eight accomplices who are still at large allegedly invaded a mine compound in West Nicholson and robbed mine workers of gold, R7000 and $1000. Prince Sibanda (25) from Machizi Village in Banana and his accomplices, who were armed with machetes and knives, raided the compound on 8 February. Sibanda was not asked to plead when he appeared before Gwanda magistrate, Mrs Nomagugu Sibanda, facing two counts of robbery. He was remanded in custody to February 26. Prosecuting, Miss Faith Mutukwa said Prince had to be remanded in custody as investigations were underway and his accomplices are still at large. She said Prince was also facing a serious offence as machetes and knives were used in the raid. She said Prince and his accomplices went to Coatsbridge Mine Compound in West Nicholson where they robbed two mine workers and left with 5,6 grammes of toasted gold, two cellphones, R7 000 and $1 000. “On 8 February at around 4AM, Prince, who was in the company of eight other accused persons who are still at large, went to Coatsbridge Mine in West Nicholson. The gang, which was armed with machetes and knives, went to a makeshift tent where Mr John Chikato was sleeping. “They assaulted him and threatened to kill him before fleeing with 5,6 grammes of toasted gold and a Nokia 105 cellphone. Mr Chikato managed to identify Peter among the gang which attacked him,” she said. Miss Mutukwa said the gang proceeded to another makeshift tent at the mine where Mr Leon Mazarire was sleeping. She said they assaulted him and forcibly took R7 000, $1 000 and a cellphone from the complainant before fleeing the scene. She said Mr Chikato and Mr Mazarire informed their mine supervisor who reported the matter to the police. Miss Mutukwa said investigations were conducted resulting in the arrest of the accused person who was positively identified by both complainants as a member of the gang that robbed them. — @DubeMatutu