The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter IN a move aimed at addressing perennial poor performances by its athletes at national level, primary and secondary schools in Matabeleland North province have introduced qualifying standards for the squad to be selected at the provincial finals in Victoria Falls. The province has in the past few years been bridesmaids in athletics competitions at national level, with the embarrassing showing being largely blamed on poor selection that amplified quantity over quality. “We need our technical committee to give us reasonable qualifying times, benchmarking them with national times and distances, so that we don’t just take anyone to these national competitions, but only medal hopefuls,” said National Association of Secondary School Heads (Nash) head-in-charge of athletics in Matabeleland North Cain Ncube. Ncube said this at a joint meeting of Nash and National Association of Primary School Heads (Naph) district heads in charge of athletics on Monday.The meeting was also attended by the Nash provincial chairman Pelekelo Mathe, his deputy Sicelo Dube and Naph provincial secretary Nelson Masukume. Also in attendance were Sports and Recreation Commission Matabeleland North coordinator Newman Masuku and provincial inspector: physical education, sport and mass displays Zibusiso Moyo. According to the meeting’s resolutions, only athletes that meet set qualifying standards will be selected to the provincial squad for the national finals to be held at Peterhouse College in Mashonaland East. “The standards set must be slightly lower than those at national level, but must be such that it’s clear that the athlete can be trained to perform better. It doesn’t make sense to take an athlete that finishes the 100m sprint first, but in a time of 16 seconds when a gold medalist last year clocked sub 11 seconds. These are some of the things that have been making us perform dismally,” said Mathe. Whilst Nash has drawn up its standards, Naph has asked for more time, but indicated that they will be ready by the time the delegation tours the Mosi oa Tunya track and field on Friday. The meeting also felt that there may be need to introduce new faces to take charge of different disciplines instead of having the same people that failed to change results. “The other mistake we have been doing as a province is that the people who get chosen to be our coaches suddenly change jackets when we arrive for national competitions and become officiating officials, leaving our athletes literally coachless. We must guard against this untenable situation. If one is chosen as coach, let him or her remain in that capacity and not to shift as and when one feels like,” said one delegate.