The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter GOVERNMENT is satisfied with the level of preparedness in Matabeleland region to detect and fight the Coronavirus. Minister of Health and Child Care Dr Obadiah Moyo said this yesterday after conducting a tour of ports of entry in Matabeleland and the Bulawayo City Council-run Thorngrove Infectious Diseases Hospital to gauge their preparedness to deal with Coronavirus that has claimed more than 600 lives in China. He said there is need for Government departments to collaborate to ensure that the country’s borders are not porous as this is key in detecting and preventing the deadly coronavirus from spreading into the country. The Minister kicked off his tour by visiting the Joshua Mqabuko Nkomo International Airport, before moving to Thorngrove Infectious Diseases Hospital where people would be taken for monitoring in case of any suspected cases. Dr Moyo also held a meeting with health experts from the region who briefed him on the state of preparedness before wrapping up his tour by visiting Plumtree Border Post. Bulawayo Provincial Affairs Minister Cde Judith Ncube, her counterpart from Matabeleland North Cde Richard Moyo and World Health Organisation experts were part of the regional tour. Dr Moyo said he was satisfied with the level of preparedness in the region and his ministry will capacitate institutions where they might be found to be lacking. He said border officials have to be more vigilant in ensuring that no one sneaks into the country undetected. “We have to work as a team all of us in strengthening our security forces so that they can help us as far as curtailing those who might want to be jumping borders. We want to make sure that all our borders are not porous. At this stage we know that through the normal borders, airports and dry ports we are making sure that there is enhanced preparedness to identify any suspected cases. Our surveillance systems are fully functional starting with that early detection at the borders,” he said. Dr Moyo said provincial ministers have to ensure that every hand is on deck to prevent the virus from spreading into the country. “I’m happy that the ministers are here.  They have to lead the exercise and work to ensure that everybody adheres to what has to be done and work as a team. The ministers are here to supervise and make sure that whether you are Zimbabwe Republic Police, immigration, health or from whichever department you are going to be in compliance. Ministers you have got a lot of work, we have to work to make sure that no one gets it. We didn’t get Ebola, and we don’t want Coronavirus, cholera lives with us but we also have to combat cholera,” said Dr Moyo. He said his ministry was also capacitating laboratories to enable them to confirm suspected cases as soon as they are detected. The Minister said the country has done well as no suspected cases have been recorded so far. Dr Moyo said Government was relieved that five people in Botswana who were suspected to have contracted the virus tested negative. He said the Ministry would be training health officials on how to handle suspected cases as it does not want to lose its staff to the virus. Cde Ncube said collective efforts are needed if the country is to escape the virus while Cde Moyo said information dissemination on the subject will better equip nation to deal with it. — @nqotshili