The Chronicle Brenda Zinyuke, Court Reporter TWO men from Bulawayo’s Queens Park suburb have been sentenced to a combined 42 months in prison for stealing alcohol and cigarette lighters worth more than $1 000 from a sports bar in the same suburb. Marvelous Ndlovu (28) and Mandlenkosi Tshuma (30) stole from Guzzlers Sports Bar belonging to Mr Lennox Muhlambi. The two accused were convicted on their own plea to unlawful entry committed in aggravating circumstances by Bulawayo magistrate Mr Lizwe Jamela. The accused were also being charged with illegal possession of dagga to which they both pleaded guilty. Tshuma was however acquitted of the charge after Mr Jamela ruled that according to the facts in the State outline it was Ndlovu who was found in possession of the dagga. Ndlovu was sentenced to 24 months in prison for unlawful entry committed in aggravating circumstances and three months were suspended for five years on condition that he does not within that period commit a similar offence. “A further three months in prison is suspended on condition that the accused person restitutes the complainant $677 before March 30 this year,” said Mr Jamela. Two months in prison was added to Ndlovu’s sentence from his previous conviction in 2016 and as such he will serve an effective 20 months in prison. Ndlovu was further fined $400 or he risks being in prison for 30 days for possession of dagga. Tshuma was sentenced to 18 months in prison and three months were suspended for five years on condition he does not within that period commit a similar offence. A further three months was suspended on condition that he restitutes Mr Muhlambi $677 before March 30. He will serve an effective 12 months in prison. Prosecuting, Mr Terrence Chakabuda said on Sunday last week at around midnight, Ndlovu and Tshuma went to Guzzlers Sports Bar where they forced open the door. “While inside the bar, the accused persons stole 3x750ml of Viceroy, 5x750ml of Chateau, 2xGold Blend whisky, 4×750 Gold Black whisky, 2×750 Heritage whisky, 19 cigarette lighters and left,” he said. Mr Muhlambi discovered the offence and reported the matter to the police. Investigations were carried out leading to the recovery 1x750ml Viceroy, 1x750ml Gold Blend Whisky, 1×750 Gold Black whisky and 15 cigarette lighters at Ndlovu’s house. Further searches led to the recovery of 65 grammes of dagga. This led to the arrest of the accused persons. The value of the stolen property is $1 904 and only $550 worth of alcohol was recovered. — @zinyuke98   