The Chronicle Harare Bureau Zanu-PF has commended the acceptance of censure and rehabilitation by former Youth League leaders Cde Lewis Matutu and Cde Godfrey Tsenengamu. Cde Matutu was the deputy secretary for youth affairs while Cde Tsenengamu was the secretary for commissariat before the two were removed by the Politburo from their positions for indiscipline. Zanu-PF acting Secretary for Administration Cde Patrick Chinamasa said in a statement that the two demonstrated maturity and loyalty to the party, in spite of their recent suspension for 12 months. Cdes Matutu and Tsenengamu will undergo a rigorous training programme at the Herbert Chitepo School of Ideology. “After serving out their suspensions, the comrades will be welcome to contest for any positions in the party,” Cde Chinamasa said. “The commendable development demonstrates that the disciplinary process is intended to build and not to fracture the party. “It is pleasing to note that the two have been exemplary in accepting disciplinary measures that will, at the end of the day, make them stronger party cadres.” In accepting the apology by Cdes Matutu and Tsenengamu, Cde Chinamasa said the party expected that the two will comply with the decision of the Politburo providing for their suspension for 12 months and will submit themselves to three months of ideological orientation training. He said youths were the life blood of the party. “Their energy, zeal and enthusiasm are the dynamism that separates Zanu-PF from other pseudo political parties in Zimbabwe,” said Cde Chinamasa. “Zanu-PF welcomes the positive and constructive contributions of the youth towards the strengthening of the party, as well as their catalytic posture in national development.” In line with President Mnangagwa’s vision 2030 clarion call to the nation at large, Cde Chinamasa said the youth had a vital role to play in the economic, technological, social and political trajectory that will see Zimbabwe ascending to an upper middle income status. Meanwhile, Zanu-PF Youth League’s affiliates have thrown their weight behind the party’s decision to remove Cde Pupurai Togarepi, Cde Lewis Matutu and Cde Godfrey Tsenengamu from their positions after accusing some prominent businesspeople of corruption. The allegations were made without following laid down party procedures. Speaking at a press conference held at the party headquarters in Harare on Friday, National Youth Service chairman Cde Absolom Madusise said it was important that Zanu-PF maintained law and order among its rank and file. “First, as you are all aware of the events that took place before and after the recently held Zanu-PF Politburo meeting, we are here gathered as Zanu-PF affiliate youth associations issuing this press statement rallying behind the decision made by the Zanu-PF Politburo and the party’s President and First Secretary, His Excellency Cde Emmerson Dambudzo Mnangagwa, with regards to maintaining law and order within the revolutionary party. “We do hereby re-emphasise that the party cadres, especially the youth, must stand guided by the values and ethos of the revolutionary party which include discipline at all levels, within the rank and file, when conducting business that relates to our beloved party Zanu- PF and especially to those who hold influential positions who must show maturity to maintain our dignity on the face of our nation.” Cde Madusise encouraged party youths to focus on economic development, which will result in job creation and economic revival. “Let’s focus on contributing towards economic development by venturing into different businesses to enable our nation to develop and create jobs,” he said. Cde Madusise praised the Politburo for emphasising the need to uphold the party’s constitution in all activities.