The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief  POLICE in the Midlands have banned the carrying of dangerous weapons and are enhancing patrols among other measures to curb cases of assault and murder in the province. Addressing the Gweru Pastoral Fraternity meeting Tuesday, officer commanding Midlands Province, Commissioner Moses Magandi, said as the police and its stakeholders fight machete-wielding gangs, prohibition orders banning the carrying of dangerous weapons have been effected across the province in terms of the Maintenance of Peace and Order Act. “We are worried about the surge in all forms of crime including murder, rape and robbery perpetrated in the province. There are prohibition orders that have been put in place to ban the carrying of dangerous weapons in Gweru and the province to thwart any potential use of dangerous weapons that are calculated at causing harm to the general public,” he said. Members of the public are banned from carrying catapults, machetes, axes, knobkerries, swords, knives or daggers and any traditional weapon in public. Comm Magandi said the police had introduced a number of measures aimed at fighting crime in the province including launching crack teams. “Arrests have been done and we are making follow ups on a lot of cases in connection with machete-wielding gangs. Patrols are ongoing, prohibition orders in place and a whole lot of other initiatives like neighbourhood watch committees. We need to revive them. Let’s not just look at them as people who just volunteer to assist the police, even as neighbours let’s be concerned about our neighbour’s house. “Home officer scheme also, we want to revive that. Crime awareness campaigns are also vital as they make you aware of crimes of concern and alert members of the public and give them tips on how to avoid or react to them,” he said. Comm Magandi said society should desist from branding machete-wielding criminals as MaShurugwi, adding that title was demeaning and discriminating against honest people from Shurugwi District. “They are criminals, not maShurugwi.  Why discriminate the people who stay in Shurugwi? These criminals are tarnishing the image of Shurugwi. They are criminals who need to be brought to book. As police we are determined to curb crime in the province. We are concerned about all forms of crime and our high concern is the surge in robberies using machetes, guns,” he said. The Minister of State for Midlands Provincial Affairs and Devolution Larry Mavima said they were tired of the gangs committing crimes while armed with machetes. “We are tired of machete wielding gangs wreaking havoc and therefore the need for us to work together as Government, the police, the church, business and ordinary citizens in this fight. As you know President Mnangagwa, the Chief Justice (Luke Malaba), traditional leaders and church leaders have all spoken against these marauding gangs. Let’s build a wall around our province and country at large. Let it be a no-go area for violence, for crime and all this associated with these gangs,” he said “President Mnangagwa is preaching peace and tolerance, investors shy away from countries which are violent.  Let’s seek solutions and implement the ideas as a way of putting this menace in front of us. “Let’s build a peaceful community that we are proud of. Society must wake up to President Mnangagwa’s call for peace and unity that focuses on increased production so that we grow our economy. There is no economic growth without peace and tranquility.” Minister Mavima commended the Gweru Pastoral Fraternity for initiating the drive for community engagement towards eradicating violent crime. “As pastors, ministers you are saying let’s pray about this menace.  Yes, we pray and we commend you but on the other hand, they must be arrested. We want peace in this province and business and investments are being affected by this menace,” he said. “I urge all churches to stop this rampant lawlessness by taking all precautions to save lives and loss of property. Avoid keeping money at home or church. These are the basic things you need to take cognisance of. Business community, let’s work with the police. If a place is attacked, we need to notify others. Let’s put resources together, so that we are ahead of them,” he said.