The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Court Reporter PROMINENT Bulawayo businessman Ismail Moosa Lunat’s property, which includes three cars, office furniture and accessories, is set to be auctioned over a debt of more than US$384 000 he owes fellow businessman Mr Mohammed Zakariya Patel. Lunat (57) has a pending court case for allegedly fuelling the forex black market, money laundering and externalisation of more than US$2,2 million. He was remanded in custody to tomorrow. The property which is set to go under the hammer includes a Mazda Axela, Toyota Rav4, Honda Odyssey, laptops, leather couches, television sets, refrigerators, nursery toys and clothes among other valuable items. The goods will be auctioned tomorrow in Bulawayo by Auction House after they were attached by the Sheriff of the High Court following Lunat’s failure to pay back Mr Patel US$384 177. Lunat was last year taken to the High Court by Mr Patel over the debt, which he failed to repay. On April 3 last year, Mr Patel filed summons under case number HC762/19 through his lawyers Moyo and Nyoni Legal Practitioners, citing Lunat, as a defendant. According to court papers, on January 11 last year, Lunat signed an acknowledgement of the debt and offered to pay back the money within three months. Mr Patel then later filed an application for summary judgment under case number HC2489/19 through Samukange Hungwe Attorneys citing Lunat as a respondent. In his founding affidavit, Mr Patel said his claim against Lunat was premised on the acknowledgement of the debt by the respondent. “In fact, as is apparent on the acknowledgment of debt, the original amount was US$449 000. This was reduced by the respondent to US$384 177 and he duly signed for it. The respondent renounced all legal exceptions and declared himself to be fully acquainted with the debt,” he said. Mr Patel said as a result of Lunat’s failure to settle the debt, he was forced to institute legal action against him. In his defendant’s plea, through his lawyers Dube-Banda, Nzarayapenga and Partners, Lunat denied that he signed the acknowledgement of debt freely. He stated that he signed after Mr Patel threatened to sell his properties belonging to companies owned by the defendant’s relatives whose title deeds were in his possession. “Defendant maintains that he is not indebted to the plaintiff in the sum claimed or any amount at all and insists that he was coerced and pressurised into signing the acknowledgement of debt as a result of threats to sell the immovable properties belonging to companies owned by his relatives,” argued Mr Lunat’s lawyers. The High Court ruled in Mr Patel’s favour and ordered Lunat to pay the money at the prevailing interbank rate. Lunat’s property was attached following his failure to pay back the money. He was recently arrested by officials from the Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission (ZACC) for allegedly fuelling the forex black market, money laundering and externalisation of more than US$2,2 million He was denied bail by Bulawayo magistrate Mr Tinashe Tashaya who argued that he wanted the public to have faith and trust in the justice delivery system in the country. Lunat has since filed an application at the Bulawayo High Court challenging the lower court’s refusal to admit him to bail pending trial. – @mashnets