The Chronicle The calls for the total removal of the illegal sanctions against Zimbabwe are getting louder each passing day. On Monday the African Union Commission, deputy commissioner Mr Kwesi Quartey joined the chorus for the removal of sanctions against Zimbabwe. Addressing delegates during the Special Session of the Regional Coordination Mechanism during the Sixth Session of the African Regional Forum on Sustainable Development (AFRFSD) underway in Victoria Falls, Mr Quartey called for the removal of sanctions imposed on Zimbabwe by the United States and its allies, saying the sanctions are negatively impacting on the country’s efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  “For us to build conditions to achieve these lofty ambitions, the AU has called for the sanctions on Zimbabwe to be lifted,” he said. Sadc  and  AU have repeatedly called for the unconditional removal of the sanctions imposed on Zimbabwe more than two decades ago. In August last year, Sadc resolved to set aside October 25 as the solidarity day against the illegal sanctions on Zimbabwe. The regional body also resolved to conduct various activities in the different countries on the day to call for the immediate removal of the economic sanctions. Mr Quartey said it was time Africa doubled its efforts to achieve goals set by the UN under Agenda 2030 to achieve the SDGs. He said it was against this background that the AU was calling for sanctions against Zimbabwe to be removed as they were militating against the country’s efforts to achieve the SDGs. Last month Sadc’s executive secretary Dr Stergomena Tax met the US Ambassador to Botswana Mr Craig Cloud and reiterated the regional bloc’s calls for the removal of sanctions against Zimbabwe. She said there was a need to walk the talk in supporting Zimbabwe’s ongoing political and economic reforms. China, Cuba and the Non-Aligned Movement have also made strong calls for the immediate removal of sanctions against Zimbabwe. Government has covered a lot of ground in its political and economic reforms and there is therefore no justification to continue subjecting the country to the sanctions that are hindering efforts to grow the economy and improve the people’s welfare.