The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma recently in Mambo, Bulilima A NEW clinic is being constructed in Mambo Village in Ward 7 in Bulilima district which is meant to enable villagers’ easy access to health services. Mambo villagers walk to Tokwana and Masendu clinics both about seven kilometres away. Speaking at a fundraising ceremony at the clinic site on Saturday, Chief Masendu urged villagers to work with the Government to ensure that there is development in the area. The event was meant to raise funds for the building of the clinic which is now on window level. “As a community, when the Government starts something, do not sit back and let them to do all the work but you should stand up and assist wherever you can because at the end of the day, you are the beneficiaries of the developmental projects. “We should work closely together and village heads should be on the ground to ensure that all this is done so as to facilitate developmental projects which will benefit the future generation,” said Chief Masendu. Chief Masendu expressed gratitude to Bulilima Rural District Council (BRDC), ward councillor and MP for working closely together in addressing the needs of the communities they serve. Minister of State in Vice President Constantino Chiwenga’s Office Evelyn Ndlovu who is also the Bulilima-Mangwe proportional representation legislator and committee member of the parliamentary portfolio on health said the construction shows that Zanu-PF is working on its election campaign promises. “When I was campaigning I always advocated for better health services and as such, the construction of a clinic shows that we are living up to our promises.” Bulilima West MP Cde Dingumuzi Phuthi said, “The unity in regards to building the clinic is outstanding and if as a constituency we continue working together and also come forward with your concerns, then we are destined for great things.” BRDC CEO Mr John Brown Ncube said in 2013 they proposed to build six clinics in the district and this is one of the proposed clinics which was given a green light in 2017. He added that a borehole will be drilled inside the clinic premises this week. Ward 7 councillor Vincent Dube said the assistance from the community run Mambo Development Association and diasporans through the Madongo Foundation has played a big part in the construction of the dam. More than $15 000, 20 bags of cement and all required roofing material were donated during the fundraising event. Meanwhile, proposals have been made for Lady Baring Clinic in Ndolwane area to be turned into a hospital. Bulilima District does not have a district hospital and refers patients to Plumtree District Hospital unlike its neighbouring Mangwe which refers patients to St Anne’s Brunapeg. Cde Phuthi said Bulilima’s big clinics are Ndolwane and Ntoli and if patients cannot be attended to by these clinics, they are referred to Plumtree District Hospital thus the need to have a district hospital. In a telephone interview yesterday, Bulilima District Medical Officer Dr Erasmus Hapanyengwi said financial challenges have crippled the advancement of the clinic to a district hospital. “The proposition of developing the clinic into a hospital is still in place and we are working to ensure that is done. The challenge we are facing now is financial as to transform it into a district hospital we have to upgrade the existing structure,” he said. – @mthabisi_mthire.