The Chronicle Cuthbert Mavheko Zimbabwe, on Tuesday last week, joined the rest of the world in observing World Cancer Day — a day which is observed annually to raise awareness of cancer and to encourage its prevention, detection and treatment. World Cancer Day is led by the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC), a global consortium of more than 470 cancer-fighting organisations in over 120 countries. The thrust of this health awareness day is to support the goals of the World Cancer Declaration, written in 2008. World Cancer Day is the one singular initiative under which the entire world can unite in the fight against this global epidemic. The day, which takes place annually on February 4, targets the public through global commemorations and encourages policy- makers and UICC member organisations to make cancer a political priority. The day provides an opportunity for everyone to rally behind the international community to end the injustice of preventable suffering from cancer, by raising awareness and education about cancer and to press governments across the world to take action against the disease. The day is also a key opportunity for everyone affected by the disease to work together to ensure that world leaders abide by the promises they made at the UN Summit in relation to reducing the impact of cancer. But what is cancer and what causes it? Cancer is a disease of cells which are the building blocks of body organs and tissues. Under normal circumstances cells divide, grow and multiply in an orderly and controlled manner as the body needs them to keep healthy. When cells get old or are damaged, they die and are replaced by new ones. But at times this orderly process malfunctions; cells do not die as they should and new cells form when the body does not need them. As these excess cells multiply, they form malignant tumors, which invade some parts of the body. The cancerous cells may also spread to more distant parts of the body through the lymphatic system or bloodstream. More than 1,5 million new cancer cases are diagnosed worldwide each year, according to the World Health Organisation (WHO). Anyone can be afflicted with cancer at any age, but the risk rises with age. Nearly nine out of 10 cases are diagnosed in people 50 years and above. Further to that, cancer can be found in people of all racial and ethnic groups, but the rate of cancer occurrence (called the incidence rate) varies from group to group, according to research. In the world 17 people succumb to cancer every minute, according to the WHO. Significantly, the number of cancer cases and related deaths worldwide is estimated to double over the next 20 to 40 years, with the greatest increase occurring in low and middle income countries, which are least equipped to cope with both the social and economic impact of the disease. This year’s World Cancer Day theme:” I am and I will” was all about our commitment as individuals and communities to act with one accord to reach the WHO target of reducing the number of premature deaths from cancer and non-communicable diseases by one third by 2030. The “I am and I will” theme is actually a clarion call to action that emphasises the value of individual action taken now to mitigate the effects of the disease. There are many rumours and myths about cancer that make it very difficult for the average person to know what is true about the disease and its causative factors. Cancer is a genetic disease caused by changes to genes that control the way cells function, especially how they grow and divide. Genetic changes that promote cancer can be inherited from parents, or they can occur during a person’s lifetime, often from using certain substances. About 5 to 10 percent of all cancers are linked to genes that are inherited from parents, according to research. The risk of developing cancers like melanoma (a skin cancer) or breast cancer can be reduced by changes in an individual’s life-style by, for instance, being physically active and eating healthy foods. The country’s Health Ambassador First Lady Auxillia Mnangagwa headlined this year’s national event to mark World Cancer Day in Harare. “I will continue to fight for children, the elderly and the poor against cancer for early detection, effective and comprehensive treatment in the nation,” she said. “We call upon all women and all citizens to seek and utilise these services for effective cancer control in the country. “Cancer affects everyone, everywhere, the young and old, the rich and poor, men, women and children; it represents a tremendous burden on patients, families and societies and the health delivery system. “It is a serious and growing public health challenge on the world and is a major non-communicable disease together with hypertension and diabetes, among others.” The Zimbabwe National Cancer registry annual report for 2016 noted that the total number of new cancer cases were 7 265, comprising 3 123 males and 4 142 females. There is consensus among dieticians and nutritionists that most of the food we eat is of little or no value in sustaining, nourishing or building the body. In fact, it has been proven by tests that some foodstuffs actually harm our bodies. They clog the digestive system, aggravate it and become burdensome for the body to eliminate. Put straightforwardly, they act as slow-acting poisons, not foods. Said Rebecca Nyoni, a dietician: “What we must always remember in selecting food is to avoid refined foods and highly processed foods and to maintain a balanced diet that contains all the nutrients the body requires to sustain and build health. “In addition, always ensure that food is properly cooked so as not to destroy the body-building elements. The food we eat should be natural food; starchy, greasy and spiced up foodstuffs must be avoided at all costs as they contain little nutritional value. “Natural foods should include whole grain bread, whole grain cereals, fresh fruits, legumes, poultry, fish, dairy products, lean meat cooked without fat and fresh vegetables or vegetables cooked at low temperatures so as to preserve their nutritional value. “Vegetables are a source of a variety of nutrients including potassium, fibre, folic acid, Vitamin A and Vitamin C. Dietary fibre helps reduce cholesterol in the body, thus reducing the risk of heart disease. Fibre-rich vegetables include broccoli, cabbages, beans, peas, carrots and potatoes with their skin. Worldwide close to 2.6 million people die every year from cholesterol-related illnesses. “Studies suggest that drinking coffee is good for health as it decreases the risk of breast, endometrial, prostate and liver cancer and other cancers linked with obesity. “Obesity can be avoided by exercising regularly, at least five times a week, for more than 30 minutes. Spending a lot of time in the sun without protection can also cause skin cancer. Melanoma is a very serious form of skin cancer linked to ultra-violet light from the sun. “There are also screening tests that can be done for some types of cancers so they can be found while they are small and before they have spread. In general, the earlier a cancer is found and treated, the better the chances are for a person to recover. “We should also consider the value of water. Drinking a lot of water is one of the greatest aids of eliminating body poisons and keeping the entire body system clean. Water is also an aid in preventing or overcoming constipation, which is the source of many bodily ills,” said Rebecca Nyoni, a dietician. She said alcohol must be consumed in moderation, while smoking, sniffing or chewing of tobacco is to be avoided at all costs as tobacco can cause cancer of the lungs, mouth, throat, bladder, kidneys and many other organs. 