The Chronicle — Pitch condition must be improved, and the surface must be green and marked clearly in white. — Team benches area needs general renovation and painting. — For evening matches, the floodlights LUX capacity must be according to the Caf CL match requirements. A minimum 1200 Lux should be provided all over the pitch, covering uniformly every area of the playing field. — Implementation of a uniform signage system around the stadium to facilitate entry/exit of people: Approaches to the stadium must be adequately signposted to guide spectators to their sectors; – Entry gates, exit gates and doors must be operational and similarly clearly indicated by signs which are universally understood; – Creation of proper signage at entrance for players, officials, fans and for VVIP area; Installation of stadium specific signage from media entrance to all the various facilities for the media; – Installation of signage around the medical facility and throughout the stadium to notify supporters; — The teams dressing rooms must be of high-quality standard, with appropriate seats and lockers. In addition, it should have: – Five (5) individual seated toilets; – One (1) massage table; -One (1) tactical board (white board/flip chart with pens); Good ventilation or air-conditioning. — The referees dressing must be of high-quality standard, with appropriate seats and lockers. In addition, it should have: -Four (4) seats; – Four (4) lockers; – Internet connectivity; -Good ventilation or air-conditioning; -Fridge; -Tactical Board; – First-Aid kits; – Electronic Substitution boards to be used during the match; – Pump and Pressure gages for the match balls. — The doping control room must meet the following requirements: -Must be near the teams dressing room and it must be inaccessible to any person that is not involved with the doping control process unless an approval is granted by the Doping Control Officer; – It must contain a TV, a refrigerator equipped with non-alcoholic drinks in sealed mineral water bottles, wastepaper bin for bottles, a ventilator and sufficient seating for at least eight (8) persons; The office of the Doping Control officer must contain one (1) desk with four (4) chairs, one (1) lockable cabinet, a washbasin and a mirror, two (2) large wastepaper bins, one (1) desk for doping control equipment; – The toilet area must be immediately next to the doping control room, with direct private access. It must contain a seated toilet, toilet paper, a sink with running water, a mirror, towels, wastepaper bin and, if possible, a shower. — The stadium must be equipped with a dedicated room for first aid and medical treatment of players and officials. Adequate medical equipment needs to be sourced and must be readily available as per the CAF requirements below: – One (1) examination and treatment table; – Emergency Medicaments; -Minor Surgery Supplies and equipment; – Automatic Ventilator; – Oxygen with appropriate masks/oral airway; -Splints (spinal injuries and fractures of the limbs); – Stretchers; – Suction machine; – I/V Drip set with emergency injections and medication; – Defibrillator with rhythm and patient data recording (AED); – Cardiac monitor; – External cardiac pacing; – Central vein catheters; – Intubation equipment; – Immobilisation equipment like vacuum mattress, spinal board, cervical; – Collar-set; – Stethoscope; – BP monitor with cuff size 10cm/66 cm; – Pupil lamp; Reflex hammer; – Blood sugar gauge and/or blood sugar test sticks; – Digital thermometer; – Pulse oximeter; – Capnometer; — The stadium must have eight (8) Stretcher Carriers (Four (4) on each side of the pitch). — The seats for spectators must be: -Individual, fixed (e.g. to the floor), separated from one another, shaped, numbered, made of an unbreakable and non-flammable material, and have a backrest of a minimum height of thirty (30) cm when measured from the seat. — At least one (1) commentary position must be equipped with dedicated broadband Internet access. — Clear and barricaded system for parking in the VVIP/VIP area with an advanced ticketing/accreditation system. — The dedicated parking area for the VIP/VVIP and Media must be safe and secure. — Sanitary facilities must be clean, hygienic and for both sexes. — Wi-Fi connection must be available in all working offices on match day. — Fully equipped first-aid facilities for fans and spectators, approved by local authorities. —  In the photographer’s area (behind goals), seats, Wi-Fi, plugs, power extensions and cables must be available; General Cleanliness and painting of stadium.