The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter THE Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission (ZACC) has said the country’s anti-corruption strategy is expected to be launched by the end of April as a draft document is already in place. Last year in November, ZACC conducted nationwide consultations on issues to be included in the anti-graft strategy. In an interview, ZACC spokesperson Commissioner John Makamure said last year’s consultation process informed the anti-graft body on issues to be included in the draft anti-corruption strategy. He said starting on Monday the commission will conduct a national validation process debriefing the public about what is contained in the draft document. “We have come up with a draft and next week we are going to have validation workshops. We are coming back to all the provinces and say when we came that time, we captured your views and that is what the document says, so do you agree with the document? We call the process validation workshops, after the validation workshops we are then going to come up with a final document. We are expecting that by end of April this year, the national anti-corruption strategy would be launched,” said Comm Makamure. He said consensus is needed in crafting the final document so that the country is guided by policy on how to fight graft. “We are going to come up with a national anti-corruption steering committee that is going to be chaired by ZACC and mandated to implement the strategy. We have roped in stakeholders in business, churches, civil society, Government agents to sit on that steering committee and we are going to have a robust evaluation system so that we don’t have a national strategy developed but not implemented,” he said. Last week, ZACC and the NPA said they are taking the corruption fight to cartels that have captured various institutions including the judiciary and media, crippling the economy in the process. Prosecutor-General Mr Kumbirai Hodzi told the Chronicle that his office has set up a liaison desk with other law enforcement agents to rigorously analyse all corruption cases before prosecution. Mr Hodzi said the country needs to take a scientific approach in fighting organised crime. He said corruption was contributing to the suffering of the public and needs to be addressed as a matter of urgency. — @nqotshili