The Chronicle The only functional radiotherapy machine at Mpilo Central Hospital in Bulawayo is failing to cope with demand for its service and as such many cancer patients cannot be treated. The country has five radiotherapy machines and four have broken down. Bulawayo has two machines at Mpilo Central Hospital while Harare has three. Cancer patients from around the country are all seeking radiotherapy treatment at Mpilo and the only functional machine is therefore failing to cope with demand. There is therefore an urgent need for Government to prioritise the repair of the machines as the lives of cancer patients are in danger. The worst affected are those already on treatment as interrupted treatment is more detrimental than not starting at all. Patients are travelling from Harare, Masvingo, Manicaland and many other places to seek treatment and some are spending days without receiving treatment as only 30 patients can be attended to per day. The cost of radiotherapy is prohibitive at private hospitals hence the need for Government to ensure machines at both Mpilo and Parirenyatwa Group of Hospitals are working. According to health experts, when radiotherapy is used to attack cancer cells they tend to come back more aggressively once treatment is interrupted. Four women die of cervical cancer in Zimbabwe daily and the disease burden has been worsened by high HIV prevalence. This is a very alarming figure and something must be done to bring the figure down. What this means is that about 120 women die of cervical cancer every month and more than 1 400 every year. The failure to repair radiotherapy machines is a major stumbling block to fighting all forms of cancers. We want at this juncture to once again implore Government to prioritise the repair of these machines meant to save lives. The reality is that many cancer patients are dying at their homes and the worst affected are those that had started treatment. We also want to appeal to health partners to assist Government to avail more radiotherapy machines. The radiotherapy treatment should be decentralised to district level so that many patients can access the services at reduced cost. At present radiotherapy machines are only in Bulawayo and Harare and obviously the machines are overwhelmed by the numbers seeking treatment hence the constant breakdowns. All district hospitals should have radiotherapy machines. Cancer is said to be overtaking HIV as the top killer so there is need to provide more resources to fight cancer compared to what the country is availing to fight HIV/Aids. The First Lady Auxillia Mnangagwa has been on a crusade to educate women on cervical cancer and many women now appreciate the importance of being screened for cancer. What is disappointing is that those diagnosed with cancer are now failing to access treatment because the radiotherapy machines have broken down.