The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sport Reporter
IMPOSING goal minder Aaron Ngwenya has been out of action since Bulawayo City FC terminated his contract halfway into the 2018 topflight campaign. After spending the whole of last year clubless, the 22-year-old goalie is eager to breathe new life into his career. He was only 18 when he made his PSL debut and was one of the most promising players in the league at the time. From height, age and agility, he possessed all attributes of a good goalkeeper. But where did it all go wrong? A fallout with the coaches and the City top brass led to his sidelining. It all started on a weekend when City were set to visit the capital for a date with Caps United. City were battling relegation and were in desperate need to pick up points. Resembling a social soccer side, City travelled to Harare without a substitute goalkeeper for such a crucial game. That was after Ngwenya and another goalkeeper Takudzwa Ndoro failed to make the trip to the capital. Ndoro, who was in the final 18 squad excused himself from the trip saying he wanted to go see his mother. The club then sought Ngwenya to replace Ndoro at the 11th hour but Ngwenya did not avail himself for the trip. Wellington Muuya, who stood between the sticks and was the only goalkeeper in the team, received a red card for handling a goal bound shot outside the box. City played the closing minutes of the game, which they lost 0-1, with defender Crispen Ncube guarding goal. The club bosses were not happy that two goalkeepers refused to travel for the Caps United game. Chronicle Sport caught up with Ngwenya this week. “Of course, it’s regrettable what happened then and how things have turned out. My rift with City has derailed my progress immensely. I honestly had no chance to travel. When the final travelling squad was announced on a Friday I was not part of the team. The rest of the squad was leaving Bulawayo at 6am the following morning so l told myself I was not going anywhere and made my own personal plans for the next day. “In the morning on the travelling day, the team called saying I should join the squad at the City Hall, unfortunately when they called I was not home and did not have my cellphone with me. By the time I got home and was told that the team had called, it was already 10am and I felt it was already late,” said Ngwenya. “I had no money and was not aware that the previous day we had received money from the club. So the general perspective was I had received money and was squandering it somewhere hence I failed to follow the team to Harare. I wish things could have happened differently. I think right now I would be somewhere in my career,” he said. Ironically his first and last games in the topflight league were against Highlanders and Dynamos respectively. He has had stints with a number of lower division teams since he began his career. “I started my career back in 2009 playing for Iminyela Stars Under-14 and with my height advantage the coaches would use me even for Under-16 and Under-18 matches. As years went by I would join training sessions for the Stars’ Division Two team while still playing for the juniors. I moved to Mpumelelo Shining Stars in 2011 and played there up to 2013. From there I then joined Magwegwe Pirates who were in Division Two in 2014. “I then went for trials at Bulawayo City in 2015 and signed for the club when it was still in Division One. In that year in June, City loaned me to Nust and took me back in January 2016. In March that year I was loaned to ZRP Bulawayo where I was named the best goalkeeper in the Joshua Mqabuko Cup tournament.” After that City took him back and registered him for the PSL squad in 2017 and got to play against Dynamos and Highlanders. After being ostracised by City, Ngwenya went to Bulawayo Chiefs for trials, but nothing materialised and finished the rest of 2018 at Tsholotsho FC. Ngwenya spent the whole of last year without a club and training alone and wants to try and get a team where he can rebuild his career and make a name for himself.