The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent People have become accustomed to Madlela Skhobokhobo’s signature dressing that includes a jean trousers/chino, navy blue shirt, grey blazer, Springbok tie and a scotch newsboy hat coupled with his trademark axe. This has been his trademark since 2013 and it has made him to be a role model to fans. But now, he is contemplating changing that outfit and leaving the axe only but he is worried if fans will notice him if he changes it. On Thursday, he hinted the outfit change through a post on Facebook. “Bakithi akelisize laaaaaaa. O Dlamdlam bathi ngitshintshe indlela le engi gqoka ngayo for my upcoming album manje kungitshayisa ngo valo. Lizangibona na nxa ngingasa gqoki kanje, only emculweni kodwa nxa ngi actor the look stays. “Ihloka kodwa aliyi ndawo. Lina lithini ngingabalaleli yini o Dluthululu kumbe ngi tshintshe?” quizzed Madlela. This post evoked mixed feelings with a number of people denouncing the move as they said the one he has now, complements his oersona well. One Kenny Ncube commented: “Keep your style, it’s natural and that’s what makes you unique and adorable!!” Pride Manga said: “Keep it, that’s your identity. Never change a winning team/ formula”. However, some agreed with the musician citing that he is supposed to move with the trends and try to level up. Mthandazo Nyoni posted: “Phambili nge outfit bafo. You can just change the design only otherwise, this is your trademark!” In an interview, Madlela said he will forever be indebted to his original outfit. “The outfit is my great breakthrough. People do not recognise me on the streets when I’m wearing something else, but the moment I put on the attire, it all changes meaning that when people see that attire, they see Madlela,” he said laughing. Explaining the outfit he is using now, Madlela said it represents old people as that is the character of Madlela in his comics who is in his early 50s. The musician who has, since the lockdown, not made an appearance on online shows, will be doing so on August 7 when he launches his third album. It remains to be seen if he will introduce his new look then. – @mthabisi_mthire