The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Health Reporter
ZIMBABWE which has one of the highest maternal mortality rates in Africa has recorded a decrease in the number of women who die giving birth from 614 to 462. The World Health Organisation defines maternal mortality as the death of a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of termination of pregnancy, irrespective of the duration and site of the pregnancy, from any cause related to or aggravated by the pregnancy or its management but not from accidental or incidental causes. Previously, at least seven women were dying weekly in Zimbabwe during child birth and top causes include hemorrhage and delays in getting medical help. In the Trends in Maternal Mortality Study, the United Nations considers a maternal mortality ratio of less than 100 as low, between 100 and 299 as moderately low, and high when it is 300 to 499. According to the Ministry of Health and Child Welfare Results Based Financing recent report, there have been outstanding improvements in the healthcare sector especially in the maternal and neonatal and child health (MNCH). Acting permanent secretary Dr Gibson Mhlanga said the under-five mortality rate had also gone down from 75 to 65 per 1 000 live births. “The 2019 Multiple Indicator Survey key findings show that Zimbabwe maternal mortality ratio has gone down from 614 in 2014 to 462 which is a major achievement. The Ministry of Health and Child Care always encourages husbands at all levels to actively participate in antenatal care consultations alongside their wives to ensure family education and proper understanding of maternity as a social function and the recognition of the common responsibility of men and women in the upbringing and development of their children,” said Dr Mhlanga. He said the programme has promoted male involvement in MNCH in various ways, from leading awareness activities among village members to construction of maternity waiting homes. “The involvement of men in MNCH coupled with other factors has contributed to an upward trend of institutional deliveries from 80 percent to 86, as well as a reduction in the mortality rate of children under five from 75 to 65 per thousand live births. Full child immunisation coverage is now at 84 percent and we will continue working with our partners to improve MNCH.” Dr Mhlanga also encouraged men to be actively involved in ensuring equal access to health services for their women and children. — @thamamoe