The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
The barefoot goddess, Ammara Brown got a standing ovation after she set the tone for Jah Prayzah’s birthday celebration on Saturday evening as she delivered a highly energetic and flawless act that left many who watched the Nash TV show on ZBCtv and Facebook, appreciative of her talent. Dubbed Jah Prayzah and friends’ birthday celebration, the event had just four acts, Ammara, Tammy Moyo, King 98 and Jah Prayzah. With Ammara having raised the bar too high, it was naturally going to prove difficult for the artistes after her to raise it or at least maintain it. And after Ammara was Tammy Moyo of the Kwandinobva fame, an artiste who is highly talented, but has just not yet been fully embraced by locals, likely due to her music which is not localised. Resultantly, the viewership slightly dropped from the 8 000 that watched Ammara to about 6 000 during Tammy’s set as people were comparing the two artistes. After Tammy came another artiste whose talent is also yet to be embraced by locals, rapper King 98, who has been outright shunned by many from the word go as they believe he is just a spoilt kid who has had it easy in the music industry. So bad has the music journey been for King 98 (real name Ngonidzashe Dondo — son of business tycoon Thompson Dondo who owns Impala Car Rental) that he last year pleaded with people to judge him according to his music and not his father’s status. Ever since then, he has been on a quest to prove to people that he is his own man. He has been putting in a lot of work into his craft, something that was evident on Saturday. His act was flawless and showed a lot of maturity on his part. Judging from comments on the Facebook livestream, King 98 earned himself new followers who admitted that they were part of those who believed he was not talented, but was being forced onto people because of funding from his father. Some however said they were supporting him since it was his father who had sponsored the party. After King 98 was Jah Prayzah, the man that many wanted to watch. For a long time, Jah Prayzah’s fans had been hoping for a Jah Prayzah show where attention would not be divided. When he finally came on stage, he did not let them down as he was at his best. He performed tracks from his old albums and a few from the latest offerings. Through his act, it was clear Jah Prayzah was looking back at his journey and wanted his fans to reminisce with him. When fans were getting into the mood to party, Jah Prayzah signalled the end of the show much to their disappointment.