The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Up-and-coming Afro-Jazz musician Agenda Jonathan Maphosa will release an album that will educate the public about the importance of preserving their culture and not forgetting their roots. The Njube-bred, 24-year-old artiste is working on a follow-up of his debut album, Love Sessions, which he released last year. Maphosa said he is working on a seven-track album called Ekhaya Kuse Khaya/Home is Home which is meant to remind people of the importance of preserving one’s traditions and roots. The album consists of tracks namely Landela, Skhathele, Ngilahlekelwe, African, Asthandeni, Imali yakho and title track, Ekhaya Kuse Khaya. “I’m currently working on my second album titled Ekhaya Kuse Khaya/Home is Home which will widely explain the importance of valuing where you come from and where you started. It’ll be educative, encouraging and inspirational. “I’m looking forward to dropping it early next year although a few singles which will serve as teasers will be dropped in the coming months to gather momentum for the album,” said Agenda. The fervent musician said the album is expected to feature renowned musicians. “The album will have different kinds of sounds which include Afro-Jazz, Blues and Jazz and if everything goes according to plan, it will feature people like Albert Nyathi, Iyasa, Charles ‘Mahlaba’ Banda, Thandi Dhlana, Vuyo, Prosper Tshuma and Michelle Nyamvundu among others,” he said. Having ventured into the game professionally in 2016, Agenda said his music is inspired by the works of renowned artistes Ladysmith Black Mambazo, Jeys Marabini and the late Oliver ‘Tuku’ Mtukudzi. “I started singing at Sunday School before I joined the church choir. I also got involved with an A cappella group which was called Ibutho LikaKristu and that’s where I gained a lot of experience. “Through this group that was run by my uncles, I managed to record at a studio in South Africa and also attended big shows that include Skyz Metro FM’s Umcimbi Wabantu and Ibumba Arts Festival,” he said. In 2018, Maphosa parted ways with the A cappella group and went solo. “In 2018, I decided to do my own thing and in 2019, I released my first six-track album titled Love Sessions,” he said. On the debut album, Agenda worked with Msiz’Kay, Gaz’elimnyama, Luandra Dliwayo, Lloyd Mlotshwa, Khulekani “Dlodloba” Sibanda, Godwin “Small” Ndlovu, Bhamuza, Thami Khumalo, Kelvin Ndlovu (Jeys Marabini’s Bass Man), Sa dee Lens Works, Abiot Tswaki and Impuzamazolo. – @mthabisi_mthire.