The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
ARTISTES in Matabeleland South province are pinning their hopes on commercial radio station Skyz Metro FM which will soon be expanding to more areas starting this month-end. Currently Esabantu, as Skyz Metro FM is popularly referred to, is accessible in areas that include Bulawayo, Plumtree, parts of rural areas leading to Gwanda town, parts of Kezi, Maphisa, Insiza and Shangani. The station is now expected to reach all parts of Gwanda, Filabusi, West Nicholson, Maphisa and the greater part of Matabeleland. Fairtalk Communications, the parent company of the Bulawayo-based radio station, through their interim chief executive officer (CEO) Godwin Phiri, said the growth of the station will assist communities to communicate easily. “We are working on widening the coverage as from month end or latest being the first week of August. We’ll now be accessible to the whole of Kezi, Maphisa, Insiza and areas using the Bulawayo-Beitbridge highway up to West Nicholson. “Basically, the idea on the expansion is to ensure that our two stations (Skyz Metro FM and Breeze FM which operates from Victoria Falls) become the legitimate voices for the Matabeleland region community. “We want to assist the communities to communicate provincially and in the process, promote arts and businesses there,” said Phiri. Commenting on this development, artistes in Matabeleland South said this was the breakthrough they have been longing for – to have a radio station that will play their music and be listened to in their communities. X Studios music stable co-owner, musician Master Zhoe who hails from Gwanda said: “This an opportunity of a lifetime that we’ve been waiting for. As a label that seeks to promote young artistes, especially from Gwanda, we’ll definitely work hard to ensure our music gets played on the station.” Talent Innovation Mentorship Exercise (TIME) executive director, Adrian ‘Drivo’ Musa who is passionate about uplifting artistes in Matabeleland South said: “The serious lack of exposure has hindered Matabeleland South’s artistic development. A community radio station is the only tool that can easily move messages and communicate to the rest of the world on what’s happening around. “The initiative of Skyz Metro spreading its wings to parts of Matabeleland South is a very big boost to the cultural and creative industries. “Our cultural works, identity and stories can now reach out and be recognised eventually through this platform and therefore we are 100% behind Skyz Metro and we’re ready to expose our raw talent to the fullest,” said Drivo. PM Studios music record label founder Prophet Tatenda Makasi said they expect the radio station to work closely with artistes from the Matabeleland South in promoting their careers. “Our expectations are to have content from around the province played on air and talent recognised as it is part of the pride of Matabeleland. “We hope this will give the artistes more exposure in the music industry and other arts sectors so that they get proper management,” said Makasi whose record label is based in Gwanda. Since Skyz Metro FM went live four years ago, the station has been received well by the people, businesses, organisations and artistes from Bulawayo and Matabeleland regions as it relates to their culture and music. It has grown tremendously since its inception with its radio personalities winning awards and artistes from the province getting a lot of exposure. To further promote the artistes, the station has from time to time, organised events such as Umcimbi Wabantu where they have invited artistes who will be on heavy rotation on their station to perform, exposing them to their audiences. – @mthabisi_mthire.