The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
BEITBRIDGE is set to receive a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) machine which can run 400 Covid-19 tests a day. The development is expected to speed up testing of residents returning from neighbouring countries, whose numbers continue to increase. Matabeleland South Province continues to receive returnees through the Beitbridge and Plumtree Border Posts while testing kits have remained limited. As a result, the province has been forced to keep returnees housed in quarantine centres before they can be tested and referred to their respective provinces. Speaking on behalf of the Ministry of Health and Child Care during a provincial taskforce meeting on Covid-19 yesterday, Mr Norman Dube who is the nurse in charge (community)for Gwanda District said the province also received 4 000 rapid antigen tests kits. “Beitbridge will receive a PCR machine for testing Covid-19 which can run 400 tests. The PCR machine is on its way as we speak. It will make testing and getting results easier. The province continues to receive returnees through the Beitbridge and Plumtree Border Posts. “After being tested they are sent to their respective provinces but according to the law they can’t be released to their provinces before being tested,” he said. Mr Dube said the Zimbabwe National Army (ZNA) had sent health personnel that includes nurses, environmental health technicians and laboratory scientists to assist in Beitbridge. Speaking on behalf of police during the same meeting, Superintendent Batsirai Mungwa said shortage of test kits at quarantine centres was creating a big problem especially for law enforcement agents. “The problem we were having at quarantine centres is that deportees are coming in and instead of being tested immediately and moved to their respective districts they sometimes have to be kept there for days because of shortage of test kits. While those are still waiting more returnees come in which overwhelms staff. “If the returnees are moved quickly, it can make our job as law enforcement agents easier,” he said. Supt Mungwa raised a concern over irregular crossing at the border by border jumpers and smugglers. He said suspects were always changing crossing points, which was making arresting them difficult. Supt Mungwa said the law enforcement agents would soon conduct a survey along the borderline to come up with strategies to apprehend the culprits. — @DubeMatutu