The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Madlela “Dlelas” Skhobokhobo’s fans have expressed mixed feelings over his proposed new outfit, a trendy personalised overall. Some are saying he should stick to his trademark chinos, blazer and red tie which they now identify him with while others are backing the change. Earlier this month, Dlelas hinted on an outfit makeover for his musical side saying he wants to remove some elements of his signature dressing which he has maintained since 2013. The dressing includes a jean trousers/chino, navy blue shirt, grey blazer, Springbok tie and a scotch newsboy hat coupled with his trademark axe. In a Facebook post earlier this week, the Ngamnanka hit-maker posted a picture of him clad in a stylish yellow overall that has his name on it, newsboy hat and farmer shoes and asked followers if they were in agreement with the new look. Madlela made it clear that he was being suffocated by the blazer. “Aligcwali bo Joe nge Hovorosi yami bazawami…lifuna ngihlale ngi hubuzela nge bhatshi bakithi. Khulumani sizwe, liyavuma kumbe chaaaaaaa?” he said. Commented one Mantshinga Fortue: “You will never look good without the axe kkkkkkkk,” sentiments which were echoed by Buthelezi Madlala Mguni who said: “Thina sifuna ibhatshi lokhu hayi yizinto zabo yo!!” “Abantu besaba ukukutshela iqiniso. Ihovorosi iright if usiya endaweni zakho kodwa if u actor, sifuna isudu lehloka finish ngoba mawuso vele ngathi ngeke wakhona loku actor,” commented Ncube Kevie suggesting that Dlelas looks regular in an overall. Fashion critic, Yoliswa Dube-Moyo concurred with Ncube saying the proposed new look has no persona. “He’s dressed as if he’s going for a braai with friends. No personality there. The look is not synonymous to him like people had been accustomed to the jacket and axe. Everyone who liked kwaito in the 90s knows the overall to be a signature look for that genre. More thought is needed if he’s to be memorable,” Dube-Moyo said. Many fans seemed to suggest that the overall does not complement Madlela’s music genre of rhumba which appeals to mainly the mature, hence why they deemed the formal dressing as appropriate. The overall, they said may be suitable for genres like hip hop which appeal to young people. However, others were content with the newlook saying Madlela was moving with the times. Patience Ferreira said: “Looking gud Dlelas.” Sikhangelweyinkosi Phiri said: “Yes bhudi yizinto.” Fortune Tunee TG Mthunzi sealed it off: “Fresh Map there. Pusha yasekasi. Looking good Madlela.” Commenting on the feedback, Madlela who seemed determined to change his outfit assured fans that his trademark axe would be part of the new-look. He said he will forever be indebted to his original outfit. “The outfit is my great breakthrough. People do not recognise me on the streets when I’m wearing something else, but the moment I put on the attire, it all changes meaning that when people see that attire, they see Madlela,” Dlelas said. – @mthabisi_mthire.