The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
ZIMPOST has introduced a mall service among other products as part of its information communication technology (ICT) strategy and remaining relevant in the digital era. Zimpost’s core business now includes provision of mail, financial, Government, e-post and retail services as well as acting as a communication centre countrywide. The Postal and Telecommunications Regulatory Authority (Potraz) has been making efforts to make sure post offices dotted around the country are transformed to offer Electronic (e) Government/commerce services. E-commerce and e-Government refers to the use of information and communication technologies (ICT) to improve the activities of public sector organisations as well as buying and selling of goods or services using the internet. Zimpost started the automation project in 2011 in a bid to do more e-based services to provide e-commerce and money transfers for the Government and the private sector. This has enabled the entity to also act as an agent for other companies using its wide postal network and also offering relief to marginalised citizens who are usually forced to travel to urban areas to get services. Speaking on the sidelines of handover of Chinotimba Community Information Centre (CIC) to Victoria Falls community last Friday, Zimpost postmaster general Mr Sifundo Moyo said the post office must not be defined only in terms of products. “The postal industry has adjusted very well to the changes that are happening around it and in Zimbabwe in particular Zimpost has geared itself to be a digitised institution, a company that will be able to provide services to the communities. “As you are aware, with Covid-19 there is a lot of transformation in the way people do their things. “Now with the need for social distancing, people no longer want to be getting to places that are congested. People now prefer buying their stuff online and Zimpost is well placed to make sure that those items that are bought online are delivered to the addresses of the customers,” said Mr Moyo. He said a number of companies are using Zimpost’s digital service. “Zimpost has also created an E-Commerce ecosystem where we have the Zimpost Mall Post, which is an e-shop where online buyers and sellers interact. Right now we have OK Supermarket and College Press as some of our e-sellers on that platform. “We have a lot of other small players and we want to bring in more so that we can facilitate trade and help people avoid getting to congested places,” said Mr Moyo. He said the post office remains relevant to the community in facilitating a wide range of communication and various institutions such as the Zimbabwe National Road Administration (Zinara), ZBC and Central Vehicle Registry (CVR) are providing services through the post office. “We are going to see more and more e-Government services being rolled out through the post office because it’s one of the objectives of Government that its programmes and projects are rolled out through the post office. “The post office is a platform that facilitates communication, movement of letters and parcels and information and now is digitising. “This means its not just big in terms of physical presence but in terms of internet connectivity serving everyone in the country. “We are the only institution that you find in communities, we facilitate communication and we are taking advantage of technologies that are there,” said Mr Moyo. Potraz is opening CICs at post offices countrywide. — @ncubeleon