The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
FANS of DStv’s The Bachelor South Africa are about to get a double dose of action when vivacious model and actress, Qiniso Van Damme takes centre stage in the spin-off series The Bachelorette South Africa. Liz Dziva, publicity and public relations manager of MultiChoice Zimbabwe, said the new show was already in pre-production with Van Damme, who took part in The Bachelor Season 2 having been selected as the bachelorette. “Choosing the first bachelorette was a daunting task for the M-Net team behind the show although in other countries it is customary for the spin-off programme to pick a lady from previous Bachelor seasons. “In this regard, the team was spoilt for choiceas the two seasons to date of The Bachelor featured many stunning women who could easily step into this coveted role. Behind the scenes, the team was contacted by other potential bachelorettes with strong credentials, but who did not appear on the show,” Dziva said. “Qiniso has been a fan favourite right from the start and we know for sure that she will ignite all the passion and excitement that The Bachelorette franchise is renowned for worldwide,” M-Net’s Head of Publicity, Lani Lombard said. “Our Queen Qiniso is quirky, sassy, sexy, smart, bold, bubbly, kind, confident, dynamic, in touch with her emotions and true to herself – the type of woman that a diverse range of successful men would find irresistible. And the timing couldn’t be better. She has reached a point in her life where she is looking for someone to settle down with.” Since 2003, when the first US season of The Bachelorette was launched, the popular spin-off of The Bachelor has been produced in many countries including Australia, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Finland and India. The recent first season in New Zealand had a twist: instead of having one bachelorette, the Kiwis picked two. M-Net will schedule The Bachelorette Season 1 on its schedule early next year, with filming set to take place as soon as possible. In the meantime, fans can follow news around the show on the M-Net website and join the conversation with #TheBacheloretteSA on MNet Twitter, Instagram and Facebook pages. 