The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Court Reporter
FOUR police officers from the Criminal Investigations Department (CID) Homicide Section in Bulawayo who went on self-isolation after recently arresting a Luveve murder suspect who tested positive for Covid-19 after escaping from a quarantine centre in Beitbridge, are back at work. The four detectives arrested Mandla Moyo (36), aka MaFifty, of Entumbane suburb for allegedly killing his former neighbour in Luveve on July 11. Moyo is alleged to have killed his landlord in South Africa, crossed into Zimbabwe and later escaped from a quarantine centre in Beitbridge before heading to Bulawayo where he allegedly killed Nkosilathi Ndlovu (31) of Luveve suburb. Moyo recently appeared before Western Commonage magistrate Ms Gladmore Mushove facing a murder charge in connection with the death of Ndlovu. He was remanded in custody to tomorrow. Bulawayo police spokesperson Inspector Abednico Ncube yesterday said the four detectives who arrested Moyo were back at work after testing negative for Covid-19. He said they completed the mandatory self-isolation period. “The detectives who arrested the Luveve murder suspect went on self-isolation after discovering that the suspect had tested positive for Covid-19. They went through all the necessary health guidelines requirements and tested for Covid-19 and the results came out negative,” he said. “They were given a clean bill of health and returned to work and now they are on duty.” Moyo’s relative recently told Chronicle that he escaped from a quarantine centre in Beitbridge after fleeing from South Africa where he allegedly killed his landlord and attempted to murder his girlfriend and her relative. Moyo, who lived in Luveve suburb before going to South Africa, allegedly fatally stabbed his former neighbour Ndlovu on July 11 at around 7.30PM after the deceased caught him stealing a cellphone. Ndlovu bled to death at his doorstep after Moyo attacked him and fled. Moyo is a fugitive in neighbouring South Africa after he allegedly killed his landlord. He also allegedly severely assaulted his girlfriend and her relative in the neighbouring country, leaving them for dead. Moyo allegedly told some Bulawayo residents that he was in Zimbabwe to kill his girlfriend’s child. Meanwhile, 284 returnees escaped from different quarantine centres last Friday and 30 have since been arrested. The latest development comes at a time when local transmissions, especially in Bulawayo and Harare are rising. Insp Ncube said police in Bulawayo have intensified patrols targeting violators of national lockdown regulations. He also warned members of the public against disregarding the 6PM to 6AM curfew, saying those who violate the law face prosecution. Insp Ncube said through their campaigns they have managed to conscientise the general populace on the need to comply with lockdown regulations and adherence to health guidelines. “We continue to urge members of the public to cooperate with police. We believe by now, people are in a better position to discern and understand the risks associated with failure to observe social distancing, hand sanitising and wearing of face masks,” said Insp Ncube-@mashnets