The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
A provisional draft of the Zimbabwe Karate Union (ZKU) curriculum to be introduced in mainstream education is presently undergoing scrutiny by members around the country before being forwarded to the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC) for approval. ZKU president Sensei Joe Rugwete said consultations with members were meant to ensure they come up with a solid syllabus that caters for everyone. “We do not have the final draft as yet. It is still with the members for scrutiny and corrections. We have received one query so far and we are attending to it. It will be sent to the SRC once all members are satisfied,” Rugwete said. Karate style heads and branch chiefs submitted the syllabi of their styles to the mother association to enable the executive committee to draft an all styles encompassing karate curriculum. Although there are at least 30 local karate styles affiliated to the ZKU, this syllabus shall cover topics and techniques from mainstream international karate schools from where all 30 local styles originate. The syllabus shall apply to learners in primary and secondary schools. The ZKU believes school is the best place to identify and harness podium performing talent and the inclusion of karate in the mainstream education system will present a perfect opportunity for the national association to identify and nurture appropriate talent. Karate is an unarmed martial arts discipline that entails defensive blocking, striking and kicking with arms and legs. It is one of the most widely practiced martial art forms in the world and has become the sport of reference among martial arts both as a recreational activity and as a high performance competition sport. Introducing karate in schools provides learners with more learning opportunities through the medium of movement and contributes to their overall development by helping them to lead full, active, and healthy lives. In addition to its physiological qualities, the other benefits of karate training are also psycho-social. @innocentskizoe