The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
LOWER leagues are hoping to get a fair share of the Covid-19 redlined fund which has been set aside by Zifa. The association announced last week that it had set aside a $110, 5 million Covid-19 relief package for the resumption of football, which has been hit hard by the national lockdown. This translates to about US$1, 7 million using the latest official forex auction rate. The money is part of the US$1,8 million the association received from Fifa and Caf to assist clubs survive the adverse effects of the pandemic. The Premier Soccer League got the biggest chunk after it was allocated about $25,7 million (US$390 197). Each of the 18 topflight clubs will get an equivalent of about US$5 000, with the bulk of the money meant to fund Covid-19 tests. Zifa Southern Region chairman Andrew Tapela said although they are yet to be apprised about the relief fund, he is hopeful his constituency will be fairly catered for.
Tapela said lower leagues had been hardest hit by the Covid-19 lockdown. “Obviously beneficiaries have to be clubs because they are directly affected by Covid-19. Once we get the relief fund, we will certainly prioritise clubs. As we prepare for resumption of games, common sense tells you that players have to be tested and we hope that too will be covered for lower leagues. Covid-19 cuts across all leagues, from topflight to lower divisions,” said Tapela. Zifa Central Region chairperson Stanley Chapeta told our sister paper Sunday Mail that the Central Region Division One clubs were yet to be briefed about the bailouts. “We are still waiting to be briefed, but I am sure we will get something. They (Zifa) started from the top going down,” said Chapeta. Northern Region acting chairperson Martin Kweza is also hopeful Zifa will rescue the region’s Division One league. “I am told there is a portion for provinces and regions, but we haven’t been briefed as yet. Everyone is affected by this Covid-19 crisis and I am sure Zifa will soon do something,” said Kweza. “Zifa knows there are other affiliates which are not the PSL that also need help,” he said. — @ZililoR