The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Chronicle Showbiz recently spoke to artistes who are based in the diaspora to establish how they are coping as several countries are on lockdown as part of measures to curb the spread of the pandemic. Most said they are not able to conduct their business as usual due to restrictions on gatherings and travel. Rapper Awa Khiwe who hails from Nkayi, speaking from her base in Hamburg in Germany, said failing to stage live shows had adversely affected her. “Honestly, it’s been very tough for me because I specialise in live shows. Covid-19 has been a huge blow for me as I had planned to tour of nine cities with a German artiste called Mal Eleve,” she said. Khiwe however said she was working on her debut album which she hoped will be out soon. Nyaradzo Gumbie, a model who was raised in Bulawayo and is based in the UK pleaded with Government to support artistes who are abroad. “Being in the modelling industry is hard when you don’t have support from your own people. We are therefore asking Government to support us so that we grow,” said Gumbie who is a professional model. She said she was working on a clothing line which he said she wanted to use to showcase the beauty of Bulawayo. Gospel musician from Gweru, Benjamin Hamandishe who is based in Birmingham in the UK, said the pandemic had forced him to adapt to the virtual space. “The pandemic has reinforced the need to embrace the rapid global digitisation,” said Hamandishe. Speaking from his base in Sydney, Australia, another gospel musician Israel Sebenzo who is a final year student of Arts and Entertainment Management at the Australian Institute of Music, said his passion for excelling has kept him going during this devastating time. “The only thing we can do during a pandemic is to adapt as quickly as we can and that’s been the case for me,” said Sebenzo. He said the pandemic has given him the opportunity to work on his musical career which has seen him launch a record label and self-titled debut EP.- @mthabisi_mthire.