The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE ousted Bulawayo Metropolitan Rugby Football Board (BMRFB) flexed its muscles by locking Zimbabwe Rugby Union (ZRU) officials out of Hartsfield Ground last Friday. ZRU distributed food hampers to national team players and officials based in Bulawayo, and intended using Hartsfield, but the ousted provincial board refused with the keys. The dissolved BMRFB, comprising chairman Craig Change, vice-chairman Thembelani Ncube and secretary George Hlatshwayo, has been holding onto Hartsfield office keys since their suspension in March and have been challenging the decision. On Friday, the dissolved embarrassed ZRU by forcing it to look for an alternative venue to distribute the food hampers after refusing to hand over Hartsfield office keys. ZRU scrambled for an alternative venue and fortunate to be offered Queens Sports Club for use. It seems the ousted members have decided to take off the gloves and take on ZRU. ZRU vice-president (southern) Martin Shone said they will deal with “errant” members of the ousted board, who almost ruined last week’s event. ZRU handed over hampers that were bought using the World Rugby Food and Medical Relief fund of €5 000. “That was a union event and it was supposed to be held at Hartsfield Ground, which is the home of rugby. Those guys from the previous board have been refusing with the keys for Hartsfield and I have on many occasions tried to get hold of former chairman Graig Change, but he doesn’t want to cooperate. We will deal with them accordingly,” said Shone. David Mhiribidi, the interim BMRFB chairman, is hoping ZRU and the past board resolve the impasse soon. “We haven’t been to Hartsfield because the past board has some issues with ZRU, which we hope will be dealt with soon. Our mandate is simple; to set up structures and ensure that systems set benefit the sport. This Hartsfield impasse is not good at all because there are people keen to partner us, but they are waiting for us to show them Hartsfield. Our hope is that ZRU addresses this thing quickly,” said Mhiribidi. Despite being suspended, the ousted board has been maintaining Hartsfield Grounds, with both fields in a good state. It repaired the damaged water pump and both the outer field and main pitch, which were in a sorry state, are now being watered and resembling proper sports fields compared to what they were about three months ago. Change declined to comment, referring questions to ZRU president Aaron Jani. “I can’t help you. Please talk to president Jani because it was agreed that we stay out of the media as we resolve matters,” said Change. — @ZililoR