The Chronicle CRICKET Australia (CA) has indefinitely postponed its home limited overs series against Zimbabwe due to the coronavirus pandemic. Zimbabwe was set to play Australia in three One Day International matches in early August. CA cited the short length of the series, the “significant” biosecurity measures that would need to be in place and the risk to the health and safety of participants as key factors in the postponement of the tour. Interim CA boss Nick Hockley said it was “committed to working with Zimbabwe Cricket on alternative dates”. “While we are disappointed to postpone the series, CA and Zimbabwe Cricket) agree that in the best interest of players, match officials, volunteers, as well as our fans, this is the most practical and sensible decision,” he said. The matches were scheduled for August 9, 12 and 15, although only the final fixture had a confirmed venue, in Townsville. Aside from the 2015 Cricket World Cup, Zimbabwe has not played an ODI series in Australia since the 2003/04 season. Zimbabwe’s home limited overs series against Ireland in April was also postponed. Australia last toured Zimbabwe in 2018, where it played a T20 tri-series. In April, CA postponed its two-Test tour of Bangladesh, scheduled to begin on June 11. Acting Zimbabwe Cricket boss Givemore Makoni said postponing the tour was “the only option”. “We were excited about facing Australia, but given the circumstances, deferring the tour was the only option,” Makoni said. “We are, however, looking forward to the rescheduling of the series as soon as practically possible.” The next series on the Australia men’s team calendar is a three-match T20 series against West Indies, set to begin on October 4 in Townsville as a warm-up for the T20 World Cup. However, Australian coach Justin Langer said earlier this month he hoped a limited overs tour of England could be arranged for September. West Indies are currently in England preparing to play a three-Test series that is set to begin on July 8, behind closed doors at Southampton’s Rose Bowl, before playing back-to-back Tests at Old Trafford. — ABC.net.au