The Chronicle Yesterday we reported that private schools were facing opposition from parents for demanding Third Term fees despite Government shelving the reopening of schools. Schools such as Petra College and Girls College have demanded that parents pay fees for the remainder of the year. Some have removed pupils from online learning platforms demanding fees for second term against Government’s policy position that pupils must not be penalised, but action must be taken against parents. Schools closed in March as Government imposed measures to mitigate the spread of the virus and last Tuesday Cabinet deferred the reopening of schools from July 28 to a later date due to increasing Covid-19 cases. The global Covid-19 crisis has not only affected schools. All businesses were affected one way or the other. Some small businesses died a natural death as a result of lockdown measures to curb the spread of Covid-19. It is with these facts in mind that private schools must appreciate the fact that money is not easy to come by during this crisis period. While it is a given that private schools will need some form of fees even when schools are still closed to keep the businesses alive, the fees must not be punitive. As we reported, Petra College chairman Mr Mpiyesizwe Ndebele in a letter dated July 17, announced the school’s fees structure which stands at US$1 400 for secondary school, junior school US$900 and Early Childhood Development (ECD) classes pay US$800. Girls College is demanding payment of $49 000 for second term and is yet to communicate the third term fees. These fees are unreasonable as schools are closed and parents have had their incomes affected by Covid-19. Private schools need to meet parents halfway. It must be a win-win situation. Government must also, through the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education, intervene once and for all. Parents and students must be protected form greedy capitalists who want to turn a national crisis into an opportunity. The disruption being caused by Covid-19 to education is already too much, yet some schools want to cause further disruption. At Girls College, for instance, the school is said to have early this month removed pupils who have not paid fees for the second term from Google Classroom in violation of the education policy. The policy states that it is unconstitutional for schools to victimise learners for non-payment of fees as it is a parent that signs contractual obligations. Like Primary and Secondary Education Minister Ambassador Cain Mathema said, no school should be demanding fees payment outside set regulations. “Any school fees for registered schools are approved by the permanent secretary so they must follow procedure. Because policy wise even Government schools have costs whether schools are closed or not. That is why under normal circumstances levies are paid in such a way that they cover the running of the schools. “Because schools have to pay utility bills and so forth. So, the policy has been no payment of fees or levies whether public or private schools if not approved,” he said.