The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
GOVERNMENT has threatened to deregister private schools and colleges which are reportedly flouting the directive on the national re-opening of schools. This follows reports that some private schools and independent colleges had started classes. However, in Bulawayo, the provincial education director, Mrs Olicah Kaira, said there are no confirmed reports of schools that have reopened. Schools were closed in March as part of Government’s measures to curb the spread of Covid-19. The start of the phased re-opening of primary and secondary schools has been set for July 28 and the Zimbabwe School Examinations Council (Zimsec) June examinations, which started on June 29, will run until July 22. Only Form Six, Form Four and Grade Seven classes will resume at the end of July with Lower Six, Form Three and Grade Six coming in three weeks later. Other pupils will move back into their classrooms in three more phases. Lower primary school classes are expected to return towards end of September. Last to return will be tots in early childhood development classes. Infection prevention training for teachers and support staff from public schools is already underway. In a statement yesterday, Primary and Secondary Education Minister Cain Mathema said those who defy the Government directive risk being deregistered. “The ministry would like to warn some authorities of trust schools, private schools and independent colleges that flout the directive that it will not hesitate to deregister their institutions should they continue to defy Government directive on the reopening of schools. Please, none of us must endanger anyone’s life and health during this Covid-19 pandemic,” he said. “Furthermore, the ministry would like to remind parents, guardians, learners and all stakeholders that the country has adopted a phased approach to reopening, with learners writing examinations in 2020 being the first to be allowed back. The Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education would like to reiterate that the date for the start of the phased reopening of schools still remain 28 July 2020.” Minister Mathema said with more than 4,6 million learners and nearly 140 000 teachers in the ministry, the protection of learners and teachers remained a top priority in the wake of Covid-19. Government last month launched the indigenous languages’ radio lessons programme for early childhood development (ECD), primary and secondary school classes in response to the closure of schools due to Covid-19. The Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education has engaged external assessors and subjects’ specialists from a pool of teachers drawn from various schools in Bulawayo, Matabeleland North and Matabeleland South provinces. So far 34 radio lessons have been recorded at ZBC Montrose Studios in Nambya, Ndebele, Kalanga, Xhosa, Tonga, Venda, Sesotho. In addition, hard copy modules are being developed to support learners who may be difficult to reach with e-learning, radio or television. The ministry is targeting to have radio lessons aired in all the 15 languages spoken in Zimbabwe. — @mashnets