The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
FROM the streets to the studio, Zimdancehall chanter Poptain (real name Ameen Abduljaleel Matanga) is a man on a mission to become one of the country’s most sought after artistes. The Gweru born musician is one of the genre’s most underrated stars who is slowly singing his way into people’s hearts and thanks to the online shows mainly the One House Battle held in May which saw him give a stellar performance when pitted with fellow counterpart Enzo Ishall. Having started music professionally in 2013, the year seems to be looking great for the 26-year-old musician who has vowed to take the dancehall genre to another level. “It’s been a while I’ve been in the game and it all started out after a friend of mine, Nuddy Nice, who was already singing by that time took me to a studio as he believed I’d a special voice and also gave me the name Poptain. “Since then I haven’t looked back, though and honestly, it has been rough on the journey and through that I have learnt a lot of ways of making my art. Inspired by Jamaican chanter Mavado and his surroundings, the artiste also known as Yardbwoy is also into reggae and holds the record of being the first artiste to record in South Africa-based Gemini Major’s new studio. Poptain said he is working on an EP which will be released in the coming months. “I am compiling songs for my EP which I will be dropping very soon as I’m still doing singles now so I will decide with time when best to drop it. I got a lot coming up but now can’t mention it because we want to surprise the fans with something very good and rare. “What inspires my lyrics is my day-to-day surroundings, the things I see when I meet people on a daily basis and I sing to sooth hearts” said Poptain. The artiste said he is happy his projects that include Munhu Wenyama, Pfau pfau, Medz and Fadza mutengi are doing fine as they are getting radio airplay. “I can proudly say thank God the Zimbabwean masses are finally giving me their ears,” he said. @mthabisi_mthire