The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
SOUTH Africa-based Zimbabwean maskandi and rhumba artistes Zinjaziyamluma, Dubai Masters, Lupane Big Shows and S’godo are set to entertain fans across the continent when they stage a show that will be streamed livefrom the Hillbrow Theatre this weekend. With artistes in most countries still not allowed to hold live shows due to the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, the event dubbed Ezakithi Winter Warmer, will be held virtually on Ezakithi TV and Underground Entertainment Facebook and YouTube pages on Saturday from 7pm to 9pm. Speaking from Johannesburg, event organiser– CC Media director and producer of Ezakithi TV Cruz ‘Mc’ Moyo said they decided to stage the event as it had been long overdue. “The event is just a way of following this new normal (staging shows online) so that we’re not left behind as this virus has left our people stressed with their moral levels at its lowest. “We decided to remind them that all hope is not lost as we can still dance in the rain,” said Moyo. He said the participating artistes, most who have not been active since March when the lockdown came into effect, are excited to be taking to the stage. Zinjaziyaluma said he is hard at work rehearsing for the show with which he wants to take fans down memory lane. “As our fans are unable to meet with us, this (show) is a time to reflect on the past memories while creating memorable moments too. As someone who’s been supported by my fans in good and bad times, I’ll take the opportunity to thank them for their support by delivering a well-polished act,” said Zinjaziyaluma. Lupane Big Boys manager Phakama “PK”Nkomo said: “This is our first online show so people must look forward to non-stop entertainment from us and those we’re going to share the stage with. Fans are in for a rare treat.” Maskandi artiste, S’godo (real name Alson Mandla Thebe) said: “I call upon the whole of Africa to rally behind us as we showcase what we’re best known for. As we’re faced with the pandemic, I’ll play soulful maskandi songs to heal the tormented souls as well as energetic songs to cheer people up. I’ll be accompanied by Shushu who always leaves an indelible mark when we get on stage.” Dubia Masters manager Fortune Tjikitji Ndlovu said they are geared up for the show. “We are ready to go on stage and mingle with our fans from the comfort of their homes,” said Ndlovu.
@mthabisi_mthire