The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
FIVE men have each been sentenced to 15 months imprisonment after they stole 500 kilograms of gold ore valued at US$433 from Vumbachikwe Mine. Fanuel Muleya (34), Lynette Moyo (22), Zenzo Khoza (26), Tubambe Mwemba (19) and Alois Mabika (21) all from Gwanda were convicted on their own plea of guilty to theft of gold ore by Gwanda magistrate, Miss Lerato Nyathi. They were sentenced to 15 months in jail and five months were suspended on condition that they do not commit a similar offence within the next five years. The remaining 10 months was further suspended on condition that they each perform 350 hours of community service at Phakama Clinic, Gwanda Magistrate’s Court and Gwanda Urban Police Station respectively. Prosecuting, Mr Silent Shoko said the gang stole the gold ore on June 30 at around 2PM. “The accused persons went to Vumbachikwe Mine and entered the central shaft. They stole 60 bags of gold ore weighing 500 kilograms which they loaded into a vehicle they had hired. They were intercepted by Vumbachikwe Mine security guards who saw the vehicle slowing coming from the direction of the central shaft,” said Mr Shoko. “The security guards stopped the vehicle and realised that it was loaded with gold ore. They apprehended the accused persons and a report was made at Gwanda Urban Police Station. The stolen gold ore is valued at US$433.” In another incident, three men have been arrested while two others accomplices are on the run after they allegedly attacked three mine workers and stole 75 kilogrammes of gold ore from a mine in Collen Bawn. Costin Moyo (29), Baron Sibanda (32) and Thabani Sibanda (28) all from Gwanda were not asked to plead when they appeared before Gwanda magistrate, Miss Lerato Nyathi facing a robbery charge. They were remanded in custody to July 16. Prosecuting, Miss Ethel Mahachi said the trio and their two accomplices who are still at large invaded Bold 11 Mine in Collen Bawn in the early hours of June 30. “The accused persons who were in the company of Melusi Mlilo and Maxwell Mlilo who are still at large went to Bolda 11 Mine in Collen Bawn where they assaulted the three complainants Prosper Sithole, Margaret Maphosa and Ezekiel Nyaruora and fled with 75 kilograms of gold ore. The matter was reported to the police resulting in the arrest of the trio,” she said. @DubeMatutu