The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
THE National Blood Services Zimbabwe (NBSZ) has said that it is expecting its blood stocks to go up after a milestone donation in a day was recorded since the start of the lockdown through a partnership by the Matabeleland Youths in Sustainable Development Goals (MYSDG) and the Royal Sustainable Development Goal Movement (RSDGM) on Friday. The youth organisations donated over 80 units which are an average of 35 litres and are set to assist health institutions countrywide in dire need of blood. The move comes as the blood organisation has seen a decline in blood donors since their major source — schools — have been closed since March which has seen the region’s bank that covers three provinces, Bulawayo, Matabeleland North and South lie on amber level. The initiative is part of the Pledge 25 campaign, a programme that NBSZ initiated to encourage young people to donate blood in huge numbers at a particular time. In an interview during the blood donation at the NBSZ CBD clinic on Friday, Southern Region planning and recruitment officer Mr Sifundo Ngwenya said the donation is quite overwhelming and will go a long way in ensuring lives are saved countrywide. “The final number of the youths who donated is 85 and those who successfully bled were 74. We were on traffic light amber which meant we are in real need to solicit and look for blood and through the donation we hope the level will go up. “In five days’ time we will be able to ascertain the official level as the blood will be cleared from our centralised testing in Harare but we are confident it will move from amber level,” said Mr Ngwenya. Mr Ngwenya said such a fruitful initiative shows that youths have the future in their hands and should be supported in programs that bring productivity to the societies. “We are very ecstatic because teaming up with such vibrant youth organisations has brought life to the blood donation sector. This is one of the biggest blood donations in a space of a day since the start of the lockdown and we are hopeful to have a fruitful future with these youths. We hail their dedication and kudos to them,” said Mr Ngwenya. Ms Mellisa Ncube, chairperson of RSDGM, the organisation that spearheaded the initiative said the donation is part of their programmes which they will be spearheading in the region and are meant to bring development. “Since the lockdown started, we have not been able to participate much as a youths organisation and this partnership is just the start of great things. Basically, the donation is to show as youths that we are capable of bringing light at the end of the tunnel and in this case being the future,” said Ms Ncube. MYSDG chairperson Ms Sthabile Gandi-Ndlovu, who is also the brainchild of both organisations and mobilised youths to donate blood in order to save lives, called on various stakeholders to partner with them and establish developmental projects in communities.-@mthabisi_mthire.