The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
South Africa-based Tshibilika group, Lupane Big Shows are men on a mission to promote their town through their art. The emerging group which comprises lead vocalist Washington Ndlovu, co-lead vocalist Jabulani Moyo and bass guitarist Mercedes Ndlovu recently lost a band member, Mbongeni Tshabangu who was attacked by thugs when going to work in the Mpumalanga province. Having been formed in 2016, little is known about the group which has five albums, something they want to change by dropping hit after hit since they are now signed under South Africa-based music record label Underground Entertainment. Speaking from Johannesburg, the band’s manager, Phakama ‘PK’ Nkomo who is also the Underground Entertainment manager said he wants to elevate the group. He said their aim is to release an album annually that will become a festive favourite in their home area of Lupane and areas that follow the Tshibilika genre which include Tsholotsho, Nkayi, Plumtree and Gwanda. “Our debut album, Unyawo Alulampumulo was released in 2016 followed by Balandeli also in 2016, Imnandi Lento in 2017, Z’bondiwe in 2018 and our last one, Amasiko was released in 2019. “Our aim is to release an album annually which we will use to win the hearts of people,” PK said. Living up to their band name, Lupane Big Shows, PK said they hope to stage memorable events in the Matabeleland North district and eventually, perform on international stages. “Our long term goal is to promote our area of Lupane, grow the band and attract a world audience,” said PK. He said the trio is currently working on their sixth album which they expect to be released before the end of the year. “As a band, we started recording in 2016 and the reason why we decided to do music is that we grew up acting in dramas at school and playing man-made guitars called bhanjo made from wood when we were herding cattle. “We were also motivated by the fact that there are no musicians who’ve made it big from our area, something we wanted to change by coming up with a band that people would be proud of,” he said. – @mthabisi_mthire.