The Chronicle Business Reporter
THE Grain Millers Association of Zimbabwe and the Confederation of Zimbabwe Retailers have expressed fear that the planned demonstrations tomorrow could degenerate into looting and destruction of property, which would result in their members counting losses. Already the ruling party, Zanu-PF and veterans of Zimbabwe’s liberation struggle have warned opposition parties that are working in connivance with some Western embassies against engaging in violent demonstrations. In a joint statement, the Grain Millers Association of Zimbabwe (GMAZ) and the Confederation of Zimbabwe Retailers (CZR) said: “We acknowledge that we are not in a position to adjudge the legality or otherwise of the planned demonstrations slated for the 31st of July 2020. “We are, however, under reasonable apprehension that this said demonstration will, as has happened during the course of the similar demonstration held before, result in the destruction and burning of shops and looting of their stocks.” GMAZ and CZR said section 86 of the Constitution of Zimbabwe states that the exercise of fundamental rights by one should not be enjoyed at the expense of others, and thus the actions of the demonstrators should not undermine retailers and millers. “In as much as the organisers of these planned demonstrations have a constitutional right to peacefully demonstrate, their actions must not supersede our rights to the use, enjoyment, and protection of our properties. “We cannot continue to endure looting of our shops and stocks by demonstrators and as such we will take necessary legal recourse,” said the statement. During the demonstrations held in January last year, retailers and millers said they incurred losses of more than US$2,8 million to rioters in the form of stock, which still remains not fully paid. “We are concerned that if the planned demonstrations are to proceed, we stand to suffer irreparable harm, as has happened before. “Such losses arising from burning of shops and looting of their inventories in the past are a matter of public record. “This risk cannot be covered by insurance and leaves the victims fully exposed.”