The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter ZIFA vice-president Gift Banda’s camp is unshaken by the Appeals Committee’s decision to throw out its heads of arguments in a condonation application by the national association, which took a dramatic turn after Zifa said it was not applying to provide proof of payment. Initially it had been thought the national association was requesting the Appeals Committee to allow it to provide proof of payment for the appeal, but presenting its case before the Stead Kachere-led committee, Zifa, through lawyer Chenai Gumiro, said its application was for late filing of the appeal. “This is an application by Zifa for condonation for the late filing of an appeal against the ruling of the Zifa disciplinary committee. However, before delving into the merits of the application for condonation, the respondent, through his legal practitioner, raised quite a number of preliminary objectives, points in limine. “The respondent submitted the first preliminary point to be decided on that of a defective resolution. It was respondent’s contention that the application for condonation filed by the applicant is founded on a purported resolution of the Zifa executive committee made at a meeting held on June 6, 2020, as pointed out in the founding affidavit deposed by the applicant’s chief executive officer Joseph Mamutse,” reads the Appeals Committee’s outline. It then dismissed the preliminary issues that the Bulawayo businessman had raised setting the stage for another hearing of the matter. The hearing date was, however, not given to the parties amid fears that the matter might drag on. Banda told Chronicle Sport that they were not really taken aback by the Appeals Committee’s decision. He said he was more determined to fight this case all the way up to the Court of Arbitration for Sport so that justice is served. “Look, we were never surprised by the judgment of the Appeals Committee, not at all. We expected it. We are ready for the next stage of the case where we will fight tooth and nail so that our football is cleaned of this scourge. “This is no longer about Gift Banda, but now about bringing justice to the game. I don’t care how long it will drag on, even if I will be left with days for my term to run out, I will go all the way for justice, so yes, the race is on,” said Banda. He said they will soon go to court to seek for an interdict forcing Zifa to provide a bank statement showing how the money (for appeal fees) was moved. “I am aware that this money was never paid, that receipt was a fraudulent document and we will prove that. We will also be keen to be favoured with minutes of the congress resolution that authorised a review of the appeal fees,” sad Banda.