The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
PARLIAMENT has indefinitely suspended public hearings and sittings after two MPs tested positive for Covid-19 during field visits around the country. A driver of a hired bus and a journalist who were part of the tour, also tested positive and are in isolation. All members of the committee were tested after the two MPs showed some symptoms. The two parliamentarians including their colleagues who were part of the team went on mandatory 14-day self-isolation in line with the Ministry of Health and Child Care health guidelines. Parliament Building is also set to be closed for disinfection while contact tracing and testing for those who came into contact with the affected MPs is being done. The development comes as local transmissions are spiking, with the total number of confirmed cases now 2 512, including 518 recoveries and 34 deaths. In a statement, Clerk of Parliament Mr Kennedy Chokuda yesterday confirmed the latest development, saying they will continue to monitor the situation. He said parliamentary business has been suspended with MPs set to be advised of the date of resumption in due course. “It is with a heavy heart that Parliament announces the suspension of most of its business due to the exposure of some Members of Parliament to Covid-19. As at this morning, only two MPs had been confirmed positive,” said Mr Chokuda. “A driver from one of our service providers and a journalist who were part of the team also tested positive. Our thoughts and prayers are with the affected and their families.” Mr Chokuda said everyone who was part of the team is now on self-quarantine in line with Ministry of Health and Child Care and World Health Organisation (WHO) health guidelines. “This measure has been taken to safeguard the health of MPs, staff and the public who interact with the institution. Consequently, tomorrow’s sitting for National Assembly will be done with very limited numbers for the sole purpose of adjourning to a future date,” he said. Mr Chokuda said contact tracing and testing of those who came into contact with the two MPs will be done. He said members of the public who intend to submit any documentation to Parliament and those seeking information can do so through the following email addresses clerk@parlzim.gov.zw or chokuda@parlzim.gov.zw. Of late, public institutions such as courts, police stations and prisons across the country have been hit hard by the global pandemic Last week, a public prosecutor at Western Commonage Magistrates’ Court in Bulawayo tested Covid-19 positive and is now on self-isolation In Binga district, five nurses, a senior police officer and three junior cops reportedly went into self-isolation after they came into contact with the body of a 71-year-old woman from Sinampande who succumbed to Covid-19. During the same week, 43 inmates and 23 prison officers at Bulawayo Prison tested positive for Covid-19. A total of 15 nurses at Mpilo Central Hospital recently contracted the virus while on duty after attending to infected patients. Last Thursday, 21 Cimas Medical Aid Society employees in Harare tested positive for Covid-19. The Covid-19 patients shared transport, work stations, computers and telephone handsets. Zimbabwe Revenue Authority (Zimra) Bulawayo offices were temporarily closed after one of its senior staffers succumbed to Covid-19.-@mashnets