The Chronicle Zimbabwe is a country that lags behind when it comes to celebrating local heroes. In the city centre and suburban areas, roads are named after colonial figures and pioneers. It is, therefore, a sad development that a handful of residents is trying to block Government efforts in addressing this anomaly. Some Bulawayo residents have taken Local Government and Public Works Minister July Moyo to court challenging Government’s decision to change some of the city’s street names as contained in Statutory Instrument 167/20. In terms of SI 167/20, Minister Moyo announced a number of street name changes in the country’s major cities, a development that saw a number of the nation’s heroes both living and dead being honoured. Bulawayo Progressive Residents’ Association (BPRA) through their lawyers Job Sibanda and Associates, filed an application at the Bulawayo High Court challenging the minister’s approval of street name changes as contained in S1 167/20 under Names (Alterations) (Amendment of Schedule) Notice. The residents want the court to declare SI 167/20 and the resultant renaming of the streets in Bulawayo, a nullity, arguing it was in violation of some provisions of the Urban Councils Act. Mr Sibindi said Minister Moyo ignored the council proposals and came up with a list of names different from what was forwarded to him by Bulawayo City Council. The point that BPRA — a well-known anti-Government body — is missing is that there are enough roads for all our heroes in Zimbabwe. This noble Government initiative must be supported and not shot down for the sake of it. After all, who among the liberation figures listed by Government does not deserve Bulawayo honour? Daniel Madzimbamuto, Benjamin Burombo, Lookout Masuku or Nikita Mangena? These are key figures and some of them paid the ultimate price so that Zimbabwe can be free. We dishonour them, spit on their graves when we debate their names replacing colonial ones on our streets. The renaming exercise is an important nation-building project that should bring Zimbabweans together and not divide them. Examples of roads to be renamed in terms of SI 167/20, include Sixth Avenue Extension which has been renamed Emmerson Dambudzo Mnangagwa Way in honour of the President. Other major roads that have been renamed include; 12th Avenue, which is now Joseph Msika Avenue, Collenbrander Road is now Lookout Masuku Avenue, 9th Avenue is Simon Vengai Muzenda Avenue and 4th Avenue through to 7th Street up to King George is Landa John Nkomo Road. Fife Street through to Bellevue Road up to Plumtree Road is now Benjamin Burombo Street, 23rd Avenue is Jairos Jiri Avenue and Victoria Falls Road has been renamed Mosi-Oa-Tunya Road and 11th Avenue is now Daniel Madzimbamuto Avenue. Anyone with a problem with such names is anti-Zimbabwe.