The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
GOVERNMENT is geared to operationalise all Community Information Centres (CICs) countrywide before the end of the year as it has identified Information Communication Technology (ICT) as a key driver in economic development. In support of Government policy to provide access to ICT and postal services to all citizens, the Postal and Telecommunication Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe (Potraz) came up with the concept of CICs which are being established at Post Offices throughout the country. Speaking at the official handover of the Chinotimba Community Information Centre in Victoria Falls to the community last Friday, ICT, Postal and Courier Services Minister Jenfan Muswere said his Ministry’s mandate was to ensure that all Zimbabweans have access to ICTs and basic ICT literacy regardless of their social or economic standing or geographical location. “Government has identified ICTs as one of the pillars and cornerstones for economic development and Communication Information Centres play an enabling role in our quest to provide access to ICT to the citizenry especially those in remote and underserved areas of the country,” said Minister Muswere. He said ICT skills are critical in human capital development. The Minister said the Cyber Security and Data Protection Bill will consolidate monitoring of cyber related offences and provide for data protection with due regard to the Declaration of Rights under the country’s Constitution. “As we deploy ICTs throughout the country, it is imperative that the safety and security of users is guaranteed. Building and maintaining user trust is paramount to the success of the digital economy. Users want assurances that they will be safe and their personal data will be protected whilst they are transacting in cyberspace. To improve consumer confidence in cyberspace, the Government of Zimbabwe is in the process of enacting the Cyber Security and Data Protection Bill, whose main purpose is to consolidate cyber related offences and provide for data protection with due regard to the Declaration of Rights under our Constitution and the public and national interest,” he said. The Chinotimba CIC, housed at Chinotimba Post Office has been operating for some months now. Potraz deputy director Mr Alfred Marisa said the facility is one of the 146 CICs to be set up in the country’s 10 provinces. “To date 114 of these CICs are already operating with 14 of them offering free training in the use of computers to members of the community. CICs are crucial in empowering the people of Zimbabwe and work is underway to ensure that all the remaining CICs are operational by year end,” said Mr Marisa. The objective of CICs is to create centres where members of the community can access ICTs to promote business, advance education and improve livelihoods. “Chinotimba CIC is equipped with modern computers that are connected to the internet. All these efforts are aimed at ensuring that people in remote areas of our country are not excluded from the information age by making it easier for them to access ICTs in order to upgrade their quality of life to the same level as their urban counterparts,” said Mr Marisa. He said in areas where there are no Post Offices or where the facilities are too small to accommodate CICs, Potraz has deployed a special type of CICs known as Containerised Village Information Centres (CVICs) Mr Marisa said there are 24 of these across the country and five of them are now operational. “It is also our desire to operationalise all the remaining CVICs before the end of the year,” he said. Mr Marisa said Potraz was working on ensuring that there is mobile network coverage in all wards in the country using the Universal Services Fund. Matabeleland North Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Richard Moyo urged citizens especially youths to take advantage of the centres to enhance access to information. Chief Mvuthu appealed to residents to protect the centres against vandalism.- @ncubeleon