The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
THE Zanu-PF youth wing has called on Zimbabweans to avoid being used by faceless social media characters who encourage them to wear face masks and regalia that spreads hate speech. Masks bearing inciteful messages like “Zanu PF must go” are reportedly being distributed to agitate citizens. The wing called on Zimbabweans to avoid being used as pawns in an illegal demonstration slated for July 31 that is being spearheaded by anti-Government activists. The youths said the demonstration was being planned by mostly online foreign-based agitators who would not be affected by the violence they plan to unleash on the day. President Mnangagwa, at a recent Zanu-PF Ordinary Session of the Politburo warned rogue non-governmental organisations (NGOs), trade unions, churches and some foreign embassies against destabilising the prevailing peace, unity and harmony through dabbling in politics, saying the ruling party will not allow such conduct. Opposition parties, including the MDC Alliance, working with NGOs and sponsored by some Western embassies want to engage in violent demonstrations on July 31 which they had initially disguised as a march against corruption. This is despite the fact that the country is under a national lockdown whose regulations include a ban on gatherings of large numbers of people to prevent the transmission and spread of Covid-19. In an interview yesterday, Zanu-PF Youth League National Deputy Secretary Cde Mabutho Moyo said opposition parties want to use the illegal demonstration to change the national order. “The planned demonstrations are a provocation of over 2,4 million people who voted for Zanu-PF which won the harmonised election in a free and fair space in 2018, garnering a two thirds majority in Parliament,” said Cde Moyo. He said Zimbabweans should see for themselves how the Government was fighting corruption, a rallying point for the faceless movement, as evidenced by firing of two Cabinet Ministers (Dr Obadiah Moyo former Minister of Health and Child Care and Senator Prisca Mupfumira, former Minister of Environment, Climate Change, Tourism and Hospitality Industry) fingered in underhand dealings. “As the youth league we would like to urge the people of Bulawayo, greater Matabeleland and the nation at large not to engage in such unlawful activities,” said Cde Moyo. He said the demonstration is being planned by online robots and people who are not even in the country. “These planned demonstrations are action of sponsored robots on social media who want to use people while themselves will be holed up at their homes with others staying out of the country. “A change of government is only done through an election and therefore people should wait to cast their vote in 2023,” he said. Cde Moyo said Covid-19 cases are on the rise and members of the public should heed the call to stay home. — @mthabisi_mthire.