The Chronicle Joel Tsvakwi, Showbiz Correspondent
Artiste, Kgosietsile Nzima known as 5iver has lamented the lack of support from locals saying it is stifling the local music industry’s growth. The multi-genre musician who has released Afro-pop, Afro-house and recently Amapiano music said the local music industry has what it takes to be a strong force, but unfortunately, due to lack of support locally, a lot of talent is leaving the country, thereby leaving the industry poorer. “A lot of local artistes are rarely recognised or given sufficient airplay as well as shows. As such, they end up having to go to South Africa in order to make it. For example, Sha Sha from Mutare who recently became the first Zimbabwean to win a BET Award, had to leave the country in order to make it and get recognition. “And indeed, her talent was recognised there as they (South Africans) now call her the Queen of Amapiano and are very proud of her. Locals only started noticing her after she won a BET which is saddening,” 5iver said. 5iver said he hopes that this will one day change. To try and appeal to locals, he said he has embraced the Amapiano genre from South Africa after realising that locals love it. He, together with artistes from Bulawayo, are producing tracks in the genre with the hope that locals will enjoy them. “Amapiano is a vibe these days as it’s trendy and groovy. Zimbabweans have received the genre very well especially in Bulawayo where it is on everyone’s playlist. “Riding on this craze, artistes in Bulawayo are now producing music using the Amapiano beat which locals have shown they love. Among these artistes are Mzoe 7, Poly da Nqoe from Lobengula West and Sheezy Icy from Nkulumane. I’m also one of them,” he said. The artiste recently released an eight-track EP titled Bekezela which he said has Amapiano songs. “Bekezela is a love tale. It’s rooted to real life situations that are happening daily across all age groups when it comes to love and relationships. This is an EP which those who love Amapiano will definitely enjoy,” 5iver said. 5iver, who also produces music, has worked with Defined House.