The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
A HAULAGE truck driver died after the vehicle’s horse collapsed on him while attempting to attend to a mechanical fault. Matabeleland South provincial police spokesperson Chief Inspector Philisani Ndebele confirmed the incident which occurred on Monday in Bubi along the Masvingo-Beitbridge Road. He said Leroy Nyakabawo (34) from Warren Park in Harare was driving a haulage truck when it developed a mechanical fault and he tilted the truck’s horse to check the problem and it collapsed, crushing him. “I can confirm that we recorded a sudden death case which occurred at the 212 kilometre peg along the Masvingo-Beitbridge Road in Bubi area. Leroy Nyakabawo was driving a haulage truck belonging to a South African based company when the vehicle developed a fault,” he said. “He pulled off the road and tilted the truck horse to attend to the fault. While he was at it the truck horse collapsed and crushed Nyakabawo and he died on the spot. The matter was reported to the police who attended the scene. Nyakabawo’s body was ferried to Beitbridge District Hospital Mortuary. Investigations are underway.” In another incident a Beitbridge man died after he was trampled by elephants while walking in a forest with six others. Chief Insp Ndebele said Erick Mutemachane (30) was attacked by the elephants on Wednesday last week and his body was recovered four days later. “I can confirm that we recorded a sudden death incident where a man was trampled to death by elephants. Erick Mutemachane was walking with six others through Nottingham Forest in Beitbridge along Limpopo River when they came across a herd of elephants,” he said. “They all fled in different directions and the six others later converged at a distance but Mutemachane was not with them and they assumed that he had taken another direction while fleeing. His mates reported the matter to the police four days later as Mutemachane was still missing. Mutemachane’s body was recovered on Sunday in the forest with injuries which indicated that he had been trampled by elephants. Investigations were underway.” Chief Insp Ndebele urged members of the public to be on alert when passing through areas with wildlife. @DubeMatutu