The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
AUSTRALIA-based Zimpraise non-executive director, Israel Sebenzo has launched his own independent record label named Israel Sebenzo Media & Entertainment Group under which he has released his solo self-titled debut EP. The EP has tracks, Nyasha Dzake (ft. Carol Wutawunashe & Marbel Jeanry Madondo), Muri Mwari (Birthday Dedication) and Ndiye Mwari (Wenyama Yose). Both launches on Israel SEBENZO YouTube coincided with his 32nd birthday. He said as a new record label, they are not yet signing artistes but want to train song composers. “We are not yet signing any artistes. Contrary to the systems of most labels, the focus for now is extensively on songs; training and mentoring of writers and composers to bring out their best skills in preparation for signings and production,” Sebenzo said. Having penned and directed the EP, listening to it shows that this body of work is a brilliant illustration of Sebenzo’s musical abilities both as an executive and musician. He managed to rope in some seasoned musicians that have worked with renowned artistes and they came to the party to show quality and skill. The artistes include Sinethemba Hlengeta (Saxophone), Lungelo Ngcobo (Organ), Siphiwe Ngcobo (Piano), Simeli Mano (Bass) and Michael Ohene- Marfo (Drums) who have worked with Benjamin Dube, Ntokozo Mbambo, Joyous Celebration, Zahara and Kelly Khumalo. On lead guitar, the EP boasts two of Zimbabwe’s top guitarists Trust Samende of the globe-trotting Mokoomba who plays on two of the tracks, one which is produced by him while Frank Mavhimira, the current lead guitarist of Joyous Celebration, is on another track. The Live brass sections were arranged and played by Tshepo Tsotetsi, who owns an orchestra and has worked with the biggest names in South African jazz. He gave the EP a classical and jazz feel that enhanced its musical quality. Star musicians, Carol Wutawunashe and Marbel Jeanry Madondo are also featured on the project. Sebenzo ventured into music when he was eight years old where he served in the music ministry at his parent’s church. His ear for talent and good music has been groomed over the years. For seven years, he worked with the high-flying interdenominational gospel outfit, Zimpraise where he often helped with the group’s school of creative arts in managing and producing worshipers, musicians and dancers for the industry as an executive director before looking west to further his studies. He continues to direct for the group non-executively. It is at Zimpraise where Sebenzo met and worked with one of the most sought-after talent developers, Joseph Madziyire who is the group’s founder and CEO. As fate would have it, these two were born on the same day and year. Could this mean they are musical twins and is this another rise of a proficient A&R executive for the Zimbabwean music market?
@mthabisi_mthire