The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo
Bulawayo-based butchery Imbizo Meats is diversifying operations with plans to open a spice and catering shop as well as a restaurant in the pipeline. The company’s operations manager Mr Tamuka Mujuru said the restaurant, Soko’s, would infuse the flavour filled meat and spice combination of Imbizo Meats and Imbizo Spice Shop. “The Imbizo brand has returned to provide the much needed quality meat service to the people of Bulawayo who are truly deserving of it. We’ll be opening up our spice and catering shop in the coming months, which will provide all your spice and catering needs,” said Mr Mujuru. He said the business, which always aims to support other farmers and producers, would be introducing customers to a mix of traditional tshisa nyama with modern blends of spices and flavours. “Essentially coming to Imbizo House will satisfy you as a customer in more ways than one,” said Mr Mujuru. Because a significant number of businesses have been adversely affected by the Covid-19 pandemic, which has brought about various economic vulnerabilities, Mr Mujuru said it had become more important to maintain competitive prices. “The key issue I keep stressing to my team is that the aim this year is survival. We need to appreciate this even in our pricing because we’re aware that the consumer is having as tough a time as we are. Keeping this discipline allows our customers to remain loyal to us knowing our prices are always going to be competitive and fair,” he said. Mr Mujuru said the bulk of what is sold at Imbizo Meats is grown at their farm, Imbizo Kraal. “This includes all our processed products which are made in our production area here at the shop. The idea behind this is to control quality from the beginning to the final product on your plate. So in a nutshell, our quality is a cut above the rest,” he said. Imbizo Meats has been in business for over 17 years, first opening its doors in 2003. “We took a different direction and closed our flagship store five years ago to focus on bulk wholesale supply. We’ve returned this year to give our valued walk-in customers the meat shopping experience they deserve. “We always aim to support the fellow farmer and producer as we strongly believe Bulawayo is only as strong as its support of each other. We aim to buy livestock within the area so we’re always willing to engage anyone who houses livestock for production,” said Mr Mujuru. Imbizo Meats, which is located at 122 Jason Moyo Street, between 12th and 13th Avenues offers a wide variety of meat products, both unprocessed and processed, including chicken, beef, pork, polony, pressed tongue, boerewors, biltong and the famous Imbizo Russian.