The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
UNITED Kingdom-based DJ Sox (real name Busani Socks Ncube) is working on his debut album which he hopes to release by October. The eight-track album is set to feature artistes from the UK, South Africa and Zimbabwe. Speaking from his base in London, the multi-award-winning DJ said he has so far completed five tracks with one of them, an Amapiano track which features afro-house musician Msiz’kay already out. The track is titled Uzobuya Nini “I’ve started working on my first album, an EP which should be out by October or November. On the EP, I’ve so far collaborated with Jamville and Miss Twaggy from SA, Bulawayo’s Msiz’kay, Zimbabwean Thoby Lee who is based in the UK and Mangesto. “Five of the songs are ready and I’m now in talks with artistes such as Nkatha and Awa Khiwe that I want to be part of the debut album,” said DJ Sox. DJ Sox said he is using his mini-home studio to produce the EP with the assistance of Thoby Lee and Mangesto. “The album which is being produced at my Southgrooves Studio is set to have diverse genres from house to Amapiano. I don’t have a name yet for the EP and I’ll only unveil it towards the release date. DJ Sox who has over 12 years’ experience in the entertainment industry, has played at several venues in the UK including prestigious clubs – LaFace, Dolce Vita and Twilight-London. The DJ from Magwegwe West, has toured internationally with sold out shows in Portugal, Greece and several countries around Europe where he has shared the stage with some of Africa’s most celebrated DJs and musicians including Black Coffee, Oskido, Winky D, Jah Prayzah, DJ Shimza, DJ Tira, Mafikizolo and the late legendary Oliver Mtukudzi. A former radio DJ on UK radio station Pamtengo Radio, DJ Sox has produced and released several compilation mixtapes which have received rave reviews. One of his success stories is a worldwide tour with Congolese singer, dancer and producer, Koffi Olomide. Off music, DJ Sox has an established clothing line and is the CEO of an Events Management company, South Grooves Entertainment, which has hosted successful All White Boat Parties for over a decade. The annual All White affair has been nominated and won numerous accolades over the years including Event of the Year at the Zimbabwe Achievers Awards in 2015. DJ Sox also won DJ of the Year at the Zimbabwe Music and Arts Awards in 2016. – @mthabisi_mthire.