The Chronicle Business Reporter
THE African Development Bank (AfDB) president, Dr Akinwumi Adesina, has now been completely exonerated of any wrong-doing by a high level panel of eminent persons led by Her Excellency Mary Robinson, former President of the Republic of Ireland. The panel was established to review the report by the ethics committee of the boards of directors of the AfDB that had previously reached the same conclusion – that “Dr Adesina had not engaged in unethical practices or misconduct”, as alleged by some whistle blower. The Bureau of the boards of governors of the AfDB noted in a communique the report of the high-level Panel for the independent review of the report of the ethics committee. The panel was given a period of two to four weeks maximum to complete its work and submit a report to the Bureau. It submitted its report t Ms Niale Kaba, the chairperson of the Bureau on 27 July 2020. The bank said its secretariat transmitted the report of the high-level panel to all governors the same day as directed by the chairperson of the Bureau, pursuant to the request of the board of governors during its virtual Extraordinary Session held on 27 July 2020. The Bureau noted the conclusion of the high-level panel regarding the report of the ethics committee  that: “The panel concurs with the committee in its findings in respect of all the allegations against the president (Dr Adesina) and finds that they were properly considered and dismissed by the committee.” The Bureau also noted the high-level panel’s conclusion regarding the submission of the president to the ethics committee — that “it has considered the president’s submissions on their face and finds them consistent with his innocence and to be persuasive.” The Bureau expressed its appreciation to all governors for their support and patience during this process that was aimed at ensuring the integrity of the African Development Bank and its governance mechanisms. The Bureau also commended the high-level panel for its work and for working tirelessly to ensure timely submission of its report. On behalf of the African diplomatic corps, Serge Mombouli, also paid tribute to the panel led by Mary Robinson for their excellent work.