The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent Former Kwekwe City Councillor, Alderman Reason Nyamadzawo has died. Nyamadzawo is former councillor for Ward 5 where he served for two terms on a ZANU-PF ticket. A veteran educationist who was a teacher for more than two decades before venturing into politics, Nyamadzawo died of suspected sugar diabetes at a private clinic. He was 76. Nyamadzawo was also paternal grandfather to 6-year old Axellia Nyamadzawo who was allegedly murdered by her mother in South Africa. His son Tino Nyamadzawo said the family was still in shock. “I was called this morning (Tuesday) and told that his sugar levels were giving problems. I rushed him to private clinic where he was pronounced dead upon admission,” said Tino. He said the family was still to come to terms with Nyamadzawo’s death. “We are still in shock as a family as we never expected anything of that nature to would happen. He was strong all along and going about business but then all of a sudden, this happens,” said Tino. Mourners are gathered at his Mbizo 4 residence. Burial arrangements will be announced in due course. At the time of his death, Nyamadzawo was Zanu-PF vice chairperson for Rusununguko District in Kwekwe. Meanwhile, Zanu PF Provincial Spokesperson Cde Cornelius Mpereri said the province had applied that he be accorded provincial hero status. “As Kwekwe district, we are lobbying with the national and relevant authorities that he be accorded at provincial hero status. This is so because he is a national war liberator who went on to work hard for the party even after independence. As you are aware, he was a councillor and served the party diligently,” he said. Cde Mpereri described Nyamadzawo as a hard-working party member who always stood for the truth. “He was hard hitting and never was economic with the truth. He served the party as well as his constituency and Kwekwe and the nation at large with due diligence. His work was for everyone to see,” he said, adding the party would be poorer without him. Cde Nyamadzawo was instrumental in the establishment of Tasungana Primary School, whose construction he influenced during his tenure as Councillor. A man who wore many hats, Cde Nyamadzawo was also SDC Chairperson of the school at the time of his death.