The Chronicle Fairness Moyana in Hwange
THE Hwange Local Board (HLB) has embarked on the rehabilitation of its sewer and water infrastructure to help curb the spread of Covid-19 through promotion of hygiene. HLB chief executive officer, Mr Ndumiso Mdlalose, said the rehabilitation of council infrastructure was in line with improving service delivery in the face of Covid-19. “We have allocated part of the devolution fund towards the upgrading of our sewer system as well as construction of water reservoir. What we are doing is replacing old sewer pipes to accommodate the growing town of Hwange,” he said. “We are also putting up an additional water tower or reservoir to supply water to the new suburbs. Under Covid-19, we are emphasising hygiene, that’s why we are pushing to avail water more efficiently through this water augmentation project that we have embarked on,” said Mr Mdlalose. The two projects, which will cost a combined $5 million are set to serve suburbs under the Infrastructure Development Bank of Zimbabwe (IDBZ) programme, which include Empumalanga West, FBC and Zimbabwe Power Company (ZPC). Mr Mdlalose, who is also the chairperson of the Hwange District Covid-19 Taskforce, said the development would also ease sewer pipe bursts that had become a common feature in the townships. “This infrastructure will contribute towards easing of sewer pipe bursts as it will address serious hotspots of sewer blockages. With Covid-19 among us, the provision of clean water and safe disposal of waste plays an important role in mitigating the spread of the virus,” he said. Council has completed furnishing of its clinic including perimeter fencing and construction of an incinerator using the devolution funds. The clinic built using council resources was finally completed and opened last year after local companies and stakeholders chipped in with various donations to ensure its completion. The clinic, which has a maternity ward, serves the whole town that has a population of 37 522, according to the 2012 census. HLB has received $3 million from the Devolution Fund and is planning on implementing mostly infrastructure development projects that include the repair and installation of new solar street lights at a cost of $730 000, construction of two classroom blocks at Nechibondo Primary School, which will require ZWL$1,6m from a budget allocation of ZWL$10,5m.