The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
STAR FM presenter Phathisani “Mukwasha Mboko” Sibanda has resigned from the radio station after eight years on the job saying he wants to spread his wings and pursue the next chapter of his life. Phathisani who presented Star FM’s Drive time show, 326 Drive with Kudzai Violet Gwara (KVG) was one of the most popular presenters on the Zimpapers owned station. Together with KVG, the two were darlings of many and a strong force to reckon with. Popularly known on radio as Masugar, Mukwasha Mboko or Shumba Pazvese, Phathisani’s last day on radio was Tuesday last week. Asked about his future plans, Phathisani simply said: “What people should know is that I won’t be joining another radio station and they should watch this space.” In a lengthy letter to fans online, Phathisani on Sunday said he was sad to leave a place that gave him so many opportunities. “It’s with a heavy heart that I advise of my departure from a place I’ve been privileged to call home for the past eight years. Star FM embraced a young man with a dream and helped mould and shape that dream into reality. “In life, growth and change are inevitable and I believe the time has come in my career where I need to spread my wings and pursue the next chapter of my dream. Indeed, Star FM has contributed immensely to the brand I have become today and I will forever be grateful for the opportunity that was given to me to shine,” wrote Phathisani. He went on to thank management at Star FM for their support during his eight-year stint at the radio station. “To the management of Star FM, your guidance, support and continuous sound advice is something I’ll always cherish as I move onto my next chapter. I appreciate being a part of this great team of stars. Your mentorship and great leadership have helped me achieve my professional goals and for that, I am grateful. “You inspired me to keep pushing so I could always be the best version of myself. I feel blessed to have known and worked with you all.” His colleagues, Phathisani said, made the workplace feel like home and it was a privilege working with them. “Continue to love, support and be there for each other the same way you have always been. It indeed was a pleasure to share my services alongside such amazing stars like you. “I am forever in your debt for any favours you have extended to me. While I can never return what you have done for me over the years, I am only a phone call away if there is ever any way I can be of service,” said Phathisani. To his fans, Phathisani said he will forever be indebted to them as they are the ones who made him the brand he had become. “To the people who made me the brand I am today — Shumbapazvese Supporters — words fail to express how humbled I am to have been accepted by you. You allowed me to shine and we indeed had some very interesting and exciting engagements. “You elevated me to a place I never thought was possible for an ordinary man like myself. One great lesson I take with me is that family is not only related by blood as you became my true family. “When things were tough, we cried together, when things were good, we celebrated and enjoyed together. The love you shared has made me the richest person at heart. I will miss all your energy and unpredictable comments.”