The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
PEOPLE in Gwanda rural, Matabeleland South are facing a serious transport shortage as some transporters are taking advantage of the limited number of public service vehicles that are operating during the prevailing lockdown to overcharge. With operations of most bus companies suspended, most people are being forced to rely on a limited number of taxis and kombis which are operating illegally that have pegged their fares in rands. The transporters only travel along main roads, leaving villagers that stay in remote parts stranded. Since their operations are illegal, the transporters drop off passengers about six kilometres out of Gwanda Town to complete their journey on foot in order to evade police roadblocks. Many people in the rural areas in Gwanda have to travel to the CBD to buy groceries, withdraw money from banks as well as access other essential services. Mrs Janet Nkala from Garanyemba, about 30 kilometres from Gwanda Town said it had become difficult to travel to town as transport operators were charging R50 which was too high. “It has become difficult to travel to Gwanda Town because we are being charged exorbitant amounts of money. Transport operators have pegged their prices at R50 no matter how short the distance is. Some of them are refusing payments in Zimdollars and are demanding rands. To make it worse when we near the CBD we are supposed to drop off at Maphane area which is about six kilometres from town in order to evade roadblocks and then walk the rest of the way. When going back we have to walk back to Maphane area to board vehicles. “It becomes difficult to walk this long distance especially when you have luggage. I have to go to Gwanda every month to collect my husband’s pension money from the bank and from there I have to buy groceries which I have to take back. In the rural areas, it’s difficult to use electronic money as shops don’t accept it. Some shops don’t accept local currency so we have to buy our groceries from Gwanda Town where we can swipe in case I fail to get cash from the bank,” she said. Mrs Nkala said there was no alternative transport which people could use hence they had to settle for these expensive vehicles which drop them along the way. She said the kombis and taxis were sometimes not readily available, leaving people stranded. There was need for Zupco buses to be deployed in rural areas so they could ferry people at an affordable charge and in the local currency and also reach remote parts of the community, she said. A village head from Ngoma, some 20 kilometres out of Gwanda Town, Mr Enock Moyo said kombis and taxis were only sticking to main roads so people who live far from main roads now had to walk long distances in order to board vehicles and after dropping off. He said some transporters were in the habit of inflating fares whenever they saw that there was a high demand for transport especially during monthends when people were flocking to town. “When we were using buses we knew that we had reliable transport which could get us to the most remote parts of the community. Even kombis used to do the same especially if the areas were accessible. Now the only option we have are a few kombis and taxis that only stick to main roads. “We only have a few options of vehicles that are operating which eventually leaves us with no option but to fork out the money they will be demanding. Travelling has become really difficult for us but we really need to travel to Gwanda Town on a regular basis in order to access essential services. People have to go to the town to access health services, buy medication, buy groceries as shops in the rural areas have limited stock,” he said. Mr Moyo said it was necessary for Government to deploy Zupco buses to rural areas or give authority to certain bus companies to resume operations in order to assist the rural folk. He said suspending operations of bus companies had left people stranded and at the same time was fueling activities of illegal transporters. “There is a need for Zupco buses that will be deployed to the rural areas and if they are not available, there would rather be certain bus companies that are given permission to operate. Since Government has suspended operations of most transporters there is need for us as the rural folk to have an alternative means of transport. “These transporters that are operating at the moment are taking advantage of people’s desperation to overcharge which has to stop. People in the rural areas were already struggling to cope and the effects of the prevailing pandemic have worsened the situation. Now they are being forced to part with money which they hardly have,” he said. Mrs Salfina Sibanda from Fumugwe Village in Manama, 90 kilometres from Gwanda Town said transporters were charging about R100 but whenever there was high demand, they inflated prices to R150 or more. She expressed concern that villagers living far away from main roads were struggling as they have to walk long distances to board vehicles. – @DubeMatutu.