The Chronicle Bulawayo, Gweru and Harare have been declared Covid-19 hotspots and therefore residents in these three cities should take a leading role in behaviour change to contain the pandemic. In Bulawayo the city council has gone further to identify suburbs that are leading in Covid-19 transmissions and these are Cowdray Park, Magwegwe West, Nkulumane and Emganwini. The country had by Monday recorded 2 704 confirmed Covid-19 cases and 34 deaths. We have said the spike in Covid-19 cases calls for concerted efforts from each and every Zimbabwean in order to contain the pandemic. The three towns that have been declared the pandemic hotspots are the country’s biggest cities which means we have a very big population under threat. Cabinet on Tuesday approved stricter lockdown measures in hotspots areas as part of measures to curb the spread of the pandemic. In Bulawayo there has been general defiance of lockdown regulations even after Government imposed a dusk to dawn curfew which came into effect last week. The situation is reported to be the same in Gweru and Harare, a very disturbing development given that the residents in these cities are at high risk of being infected. Residents are not confining themselves to their homes as advised but are going about their day-to-day business as though there is no Covid-19. People are gathering in their numbers at flea markets, drinking places, shopping centres, parties and families continue to meet in their numbers for family events, a confirmation that people do not appreciate the impact of gatherings in the spread of the pandemic. Health experts say a single person can infect thousands of people at a gathering hence the need for communities to strive to limit the numbers at any event. It is because of this realisation that companies are reducing numbers of workers operating from premises by investing in systems to enable employees to work from home. It is therefore imperative for citizens to take all measures necessary to minimise exposure to this devastating virus that has already claimed millions worldwide. Bulawayo, Gweru and Harare residents cannot afford to flout lockdown regulations because the virus is now in their communities. Residents have to forgo some of the liberties such as socialising at drinking places, parties, family gatherings, shopping at flea markets and other such interaction events in order to stay safe from the pandemic. More hours must be spent in the confines of their homes except those in essential services who again should ensure they do not bring the virus home.