The Chronicle Fungai Muderere, Senior Sports Reporter
FOR the second time inside a month, ambitious Southern Region Division One side Talen Vision handed out 100 food hampers to their Under-13, Under-15, Under-17 and Division Three outfits in Nkulumane yesterday. Each recipient received 10kgs mealie-meal, 2kgs sugar, 2kgs rice, 750 millilitres cooking oil, 500 grammes sugar beans, 1kg salt and 100g soya chunks. Zifa Southern Region administrator Augustine Moyo said by extending such help, Talen Vision had upheld the true spirit of Ubuntu. “As an association and Bulawayo province we say this is a job well done. The negative effects of Covid-19 are being felt everywhere and we want to thank the Talen Vision family for upholding the true spirit of Ubuntu. It’s good to see that with their sponsors they continue to realise the importance of giving back to the community. We wish to see other local clubs engaging in such initiatives that cultivate a culture of loyalty and a sense of belonging in these young players,” said Moyo. Talen Vision manager Juma Phiri, who also doubles up as the team’s spokesperson, said they will not tire cushioning members of their feeder sides. “We will not tire doing so because a number of families are still feeling the negative effects of Covid-19. We may not be giving them much, but we are grateful that our club sponsors have seen the need to keep on supporting the young players. The ball is now in the players court. They should remain patient and keep fit,” said Phiri. Club patron Otrick Siziba hailed Talen Vision sponsors and challenged the youngsters to stay away from mischief. “These are trying times but there is no need for these young players to roam the streets aimlessly. An idle mind is very dangerous. These young boys should consider staying positive and shun mischievous elements. They should continue valuing the precious gift of life and football, which they can now pursue as a fulltime career,” said Siziba. While most of their Southern Region Division One counterparts are struggling to remunerate players and coaches due to the Covid-19 lockdown inactivity, Talen Vision first team players and coaches have been ly receiving their monthly salaries. — FungaiMuderere