The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
WHILE Zifa insists that today’s unusual meeting with the Premier Soccer League governors will discuss the status of football in the country, it has since emerged that there is a covert agenda aimed at foiling calls for an extraordinary congress that some councillors are agitating for. The “renegade” councillors are already in the process of drafting a petition against Zifa president Felton Kamambo and his executive committee, with a cocktail of charges ranging from abuse of office, rampant violation of the constitution, embezzlement of funds as well as personal battles such as the Gift Banda and Chamu Chiwanza cases. These, the aggrieved councillors said, are detrimental to football operations in the country. An extraordinary congress, according to Article 28 of the Zifa constitution, can be convened by the executive committee if one third of Zifa members make such a request in writing. The request shall specify the items on the agenda and if the meeting is not convened, members that requested it may convene the congress themselves. As a last resort, the members may request assistance from Caf or Fifa. The venue, date and agenda of the extraordinary meeting shall be notified to delegates at least 40 days before the date of the meeting. Zifa has 60 members, although constitutionally 58 are recognised. This means 20 of these members can sign the petition for an extraordinary meeting. Sources said it is the number that can set the extraordinary meeting in motion that is making those in the echelons of power at Zifa uncomfortable, and with the PSL having 18 governors, getting 20 signatures might not prove to be such a difficult task. “The agenda for the meeting tomorrow (today) is to discuss the status of football in the country. Why PSL governors alone? It’s simple, because they are the biggest affiliate,” said Zifa communications manager Xolisani Gwesela. But Chronicle Sport was told yesterday that the “status of football” mantra was just a smokescreen to hoodwink people. “The winds of change within the association have been detected and people are afraid big time. Zifa knows fully well that it will not be a difficult task to get 20 signatures because a number of PSL governors are not happy with how Gift Banda’s case has been handled, so calling them together will be a perfect opportunity for Zifa to preach their gospel to the unconverted. Zifa knows that PSL governors on most matters involving Zifa speak with one voice,” said an insider. The revolt at the national football association will not be happening for the first time, having previously led to the fall of Harare business mogul Cuthbert Dube after councillors united against the ouster of then Zifa vice-president Omega Sibanda.