The Chronicle Eddie Chikamhi, Harare Bureau
THE football fraternity in Zimbabwe yesterday said the late Cabinet Minister Perrance Shiri was not just a passionate football fan but he did more during his lifetime to shape the history of the domestic game. The news of the 65-year old former football administrator death caught the nation by surprise yesterday. However, administrators that spoke to The Herald yesterday said his legacy, especially with the national team and the uniformed forces football teams will live forever. Former Zifa chief executive officer Jonathan Mashingaidze said Shiri had always been part of the domestic football family since time immemorial. He said Shiri was called on various occasions when the national team was in trouble and his interventions made sure the national game thrived. Through his efforts, Mashingaidze said, the Warriors were able to fly to the DRC at the height of the Ebola epidemic to fulfil a crucial Africa Cup of Nations qualifier when the game had appeared in doubt following the boycott by several senior players. “You cannot take it away from him that he was part of the family of football for a very long time. We really commiserate with the Government, his family and the whole of Zimbabwe on this loss. “It’s such a big loss. I remember in 1995 when the nation was faced with a crisis after the entire national team boycotted the match against Zaire because of the deadly Ebola virus. “Shiri was approached and he facilitated an aircraft to take the team to Zaire and back. He had a close football working relationship with former ZIFA president Cuthbert Dube and Rafik Khan. “He was also available for FC Platinum’s maiden campaign in the CAF Champions League in 2012. Remember there was an issue about the airport and the distance to be travelled by the visiting team. “Zifa approached him and he offered to facilitate aircraft to ferry the visiting team to Zvishavane where they would land at the Zvishavane aerodrome but CAF still insisted that there were no top hotels in the area and FC Platinum were unfortunately moved to Bulawayo,” said Mashingaidze. Long-serving football servant and ex-ZIFA administrator Lazarus Mhurushomana said Shiri had a deep passion for football as shown by his involvement with the likes of Chapungu, Blue Swallows and Black Rhinos. Shiri was also central in the success of the annual Zimbabwe Defence Forces Trophy, which has been a permanent feature on the domestic football calendar for decades. “No doubt, he had a rich history in the development of football in Zimbabwe. He was there during Chapungu’s formative stages, when they were still trying to break into competitive football. Initially they were called Air Force of Zimbabwe Football Club before they changed the name to Chapungu. “I remember very well he was the driving force behind the team. He was still a young man that time but in terms of motivation he was a huge force to reckon with within the uniformed forces football teams. “Although many people associate him with Chapungu, the truth is he encouraged the participation of all the uniformed forces teams in football, he was very supportive of football in particular. “Words may fail me but what I can say is that he was a true sportsman with unparalleled passion for football. He was a regular figure in the organization and running of the ZDF Trophy. He played a huge part to keep that tournament going over the years,” said Mhurushomana. A former Black Rhinos executive member who opted to remain anonymous said Shiri left indelible footprints in the history of the country’s uniformed forces teams. He said Zimbabwean football history cannot be complete without mentioning the contributions of the uniformed forces teams. “His commitment to sport has always been of the highest order. There are some people who excel in just talking and giving promises. But there is more to the talking; it’s what you do that matters. “Shiri was very supportive not only to the AFZ teams but to the whole Defence Forces. He did a lot for the teams. He also supported the national team, the Warriors, in fund-raising efforts. “He was one guy who thrived on action. Surprisingly, he was so approachable despite his high profile. He was a common sense leader who related well with all the people at all levels. “When you interact with someone senior, who makes a positive impact in your life, you get to understand better the void they leave when they die,” said the official. Zifa also sent their condolence message in which they shared the grief of losing a leader with a passion for football development. The association’s spokesperson Xolisani Gwesela yesterday said Shiri’s legacy will be remembered forever. “The beautiful game of football has lost a passionate cadre who contributed immensely to the development of football. He was very supportive of various Air Force of Zimbabwe teams including Chapungu and Blue Swallows during his time as Air Marshal. “It is an undeniable fact that uniformed forces teams have contributed to the development of the game in Zimbabwe and the rich history of football we enjoy. “It was all through the sacrifices of people like Shiri that such teams have managed to survive and grow over the years. He also supported women’s football, in particular his involvement with the Swallows women’s team,” said Gwesela.