The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Fall Reporter
A 31-YEAR-OLD Victoria Falls woman who allegedly fatally stabbed her husband with a kitchen knife for refusing to open the door for her has been granted $2 000 bail. Victoria Falls magistrate Ms Linda Dzvene yesterday granted Sithandazile Sibanda bail after the accused’s lawyer Mrs Nomusa Khumalo of Mvhiringi and Associates applied to the High Court which granted the consent order. The State was not opposed to bail. Sibanda was ordered to reside at an alternative address, not to interfere with witnesses, surrender travel documents and report at Victoria Falls Police Station once fortnightly on Mondays as part of her bail conditions. She was staying with the now deceased Mohamed Vain (26) at House Number 6047 in Mkhosana when she allegedly committed the offence on Sunday. Sibanda has not been formally charged with the murder. She will be back in court on July 28 for routine remand. Details of the case according to prosecutors are that Sibanda used a kitchen knife to stab Vain once on the back causing his instant death. He bled from the nose and mouth. The two had been customarily married for about two years and Vain was a well-known vendor who operated from Comesa Market, popularly known as Emaplankeni. “On 12 July at House Number 6047 Mkhosana, the accused caused the instant death of Mohamed Vain aged 26 by stabbing him with a kitchen knife once on the back. The deceased bled profusely and died on the spot,” said Mrs Sithabile Daka-Mungombe, the prosecutor. Sibanda had allegedly left Vain at home in the morning while going for booze with friends and returned drunk after 9PM. She allegedly knocked at the window and he refused to open the door. Their landlady’s children later opened it. Sibanda entered the house and allegedly picked an iron bar from the kitchen and attacked Vain who was in bed in the couple’s bedroom. The two wrestled for the iron bar and Vain disarmed her in the corridor leading to the kitchen. After disarming her, Vain started walking away and Sibanda allegedly drew a kitchen knife and stabbed him once on the back. Sibanda allegedly attempted to flee into the bush soon after committing the crime and police who attended the crime scene ran after her and arrested her.
The knife and iron bar were recovered. — @ncubeleon