The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
IT’S looking bright for Wankie and Zimbabwe football legend Amos Rendo, who had his first blood transfusion at Hwange Colliery Hospital on Saturday following an overwhelming response to the family’s appeal for help. Rendo, a rock solid defender for Chipangano and the national team during his playing days, was diagnosed with critically low haemoglobin levels that measured at 3,3 grammes per decilitre instead of between 13 and 16 grammes per decilitre. The family with the assistance of former Hwange goalkeeper and coach Weekly Mwale appealed for assistance to raise the required US$300 to buy blood for transfusion . There was a massive response from members of the public including politicians like Zanu-PF central committee member Fati Mpofu, coaches Paul Moyo, Bongani Mafu, Agent Sawu, David Phiri, Godfrey Paradza, Mthenjwa Moyo, Mandla Mpofu, Mebelo Njekwa and Luke Masomere. Former and current players, Vitalis Kamocha, Gilbert Zulu, Clemence Matawu, Abraham Mbaiwa, Mkhokheli Dube, Oswald ‘Cargo’ Sibanda, Richard Choruma, Leon Mwale, Mayfield Daka, Shimani Mathe, Jabulani Ngwenya, Douglas ‘British Mloyi, Chabuka Mwale, Fortune Ncube, Siza Dube, Stanley Nkomo, Chenjerai Dube and Juma Chitonje among others, also responded. Zifa Southern Region executive committee member Fiso Siziba, former regional boss Musa Mandaza, Bulawayo Province executive committee member Otrick Siziba, Chicken Inn secretary and renowned City lawyer Tawengwa Hara, Bulawayo Chiefs chairman James Rugwevera and Zifa panel referee Bwanali Bonamali, former Chronicle Sports Editor Lovemore Dube and some diasporans also donated. More than $11 000 and US$300 was raised in cash in addition to donations in kind. The family expressed gratitude to the overwhelming response to their appeal for assistance. “The old man is in high spirits and as family we are extremely grateful to everyone that has assisted us. “We are humbIed by this benevolence and may such gestures be extended to every other person who sends an SOS. Once again a big thank you to everyone that contributed from their hard earned cash; no donation is too small or too big. Zikomo kwambili,” said Rendo’s son Thembinkosi, himself a former Hwange player, whose promising career was brought to an abrupt end by an injury. Rendo played for Chipangano from the early 1960s before hanging up his boots just after independence. He lifted the Castle Cup with Chipangano in 1970 and 1973, and was among the 1975 Soccer Stars of the Year finalists alongside greats like George Shaya, Tymon Mabaleka, Posani Sibanda, Rodrick Simwanza, Oliver Kateya, Josiah Nxumalo, Herman Hendrickes, Daniel Chikanda, Billy Sharman and David Muchineripi.