The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo
IT’S been quite cold of late and to be frank, warmth has often taken precedence over style. Because it’s been so cold, I’ve been concentrating more on my layers than anything else. A lot of us have been. It works out okay sometimes, but it’s disastrous at other times. Weekdays are the hardest if your boss is hectic about dressing formally. Of course you want to look professional, but sometimes the weather just won’t allow. You just want to slap on sneakers, track bottoms and a hoodie. As long as the work gets done, right? Wrong. Your professional image matters during all seasons. If you haven’t already added a few warm pieces to your work wardrobe, you may want to start doing so. But, when the setting permits, nothing beats a good old hoodie. I’ve always been a fan of hoodies, but have over the years invested more in blazers and coats. It wasn’t until recently that I realised I only had one hoodie. Just one! My mother bought me this hoodie back in 2011 — it’s a miracle it’s still in good condition. I had stopped wearing it in public though. I mean, that would be pushing it. I was sitting at home comfortably one day when I realised absolutely no effort was required to dress that hoodie. My hoodie made me realise I was depriving myself of quite a lot of warmth, comfort and convenience. Nothing is as easy as dressing up a hoodie. You don’t have to think hard about what type of pants or shoes to wear the hoodie with. A pair of jeans or track bottoms and sneakers or chucks will pretty much do the trick. To me, what’s more important is the type of hoodie. I personally prefer one without a zipper at the front. It appears better put together than one with a zipper. It also sits on your body better. If the winter cravings have started showing on your waist area, a hoodie could do a great job hiding this while also giving you a bit of style. I’ve been of late going for hoodies in neutral colours but with a bit of an elaborate print. Because a hoodie look is simple with likely jeans and chucks, the print on your hoodie will give the look a bit of flare. It also makes it easier for you to slap on dark coloured pants because the hoodie is after all, the star of the outfit. If you pick your hoodies carefully, you could actually wear them with pretty much any colour jeans or track bottoms. I know laundry days are fewer during winter, that’s why it’s always important to wear a cotton T-shirt underneath your hoodie. Cotton is a great absorbent and yes, you do sweat during winter. Wearing sleeveless layers will force you to wash your hoodie sooner than you’d like because you’d have sweated directly onto it. This has always been a golden rule of mine. Wear your fragrance directly onto your skin and not on your clothes. Remember, you’re not going to wash your hoodie soon after the first wear and old perfume can stink. You obviously don’t want to wear your hoodie with formal pants and dress shoes like I sometimes see some men do. Even a skirt and a hoodie. Seriously though! Once you wear a hoodie, you’re saying your look is casual — why then pair it with formal shoes and pants? Unless it’s casual Friday, you can’t rock a hoodie to work. Well, as long as you’re not in jeans and sneakers. Until next week, flaunt your pattern and style and don’t forget to catch with me on Twitter handle @PatternStyleZw or WhatsApp +263774492700.