The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
INTERNATIONALLY acclaimed Nigerian musician Patoranking has fulfilled his promise of providing scholarships to fellow Africans as a way of giving back to those who have supported his music journey. A Zimbabwean, Hanisani Nleya, is part of the 10 beneficiaries who have been selected for the African Leadership University (ALU) Patoranking Scholarship Programme 2020/2021. The beneficiaries drawn from Zimbabwe, Ghana, Nigeria, Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, Burkina Faso, Kenya and Liberia are set to enrol at the African Leadership University at campuses in Rwanda and Mauritius. Other selected students are Nigerians Chidera Nnadozie and Abdulmaleek Usman, Ghanaian Emmanuel Markwei, Tanzanian Hardness Range, Ugandan Amos Kasumba, Liberian Kafumba S Daramay, Kenyan Emmanuel Okorwoit, Rwandan Sandra Mugeniwayesu and Youssouf Ouedraogo from Burkina Faso. The Patoranking Scholarship was set up in partnership with ALU to identify young Africans in low-income areas with an exceptional track record of impact within their communities to connect them with a world-class education that will enable them to scale this impact. In a statement, Patoranking’s team said: “Earlier this year, award-winning Nigerian dancehall artist Patoranking announced at an information session in Lagos, that he will be offering 10 fully-paid scholarships for promising students from across Africa to attend the prestigious African Leadership University (ALU) in 2020. “In a signed release, he announced that these 10 outstanding students have been selected after reviewing thousands of applications from over 45 countries in Africa. The recipients of this scholarship will receive full coverage for their tuition and other study-related costs to study at the African Leadership University. “These young Africans have distinguished themselves through their vision, resilience and the impact they have already made in their communities despite their financial limitations. They have demonstrated exceptional potential in becoming part of the next generation of leaders that will greatly improve the continent and it’s the potential impact that I see them making that gets me excited.” Said the Director of Admissions at ALU, Tino Elgner: “We are excited to receive these 10 Patoranking scholars to both our Rwanda and Mauritius Campuses for the 2020 session. The scholarship was highly contested and these young Africans were able to stand out clearly with an impressive story. “We are even more confident that they will go on to create positive change starting from their communities.” Patoranking added that he will follow up personally with each Patoranking Scholar throughout the duration of their study and support their development into entrepreneurial leaders. With many hits to his name including My Woman My Everything, Confirm and This Kind Love, Patoranking, has made major waves over the last few years with his unique blend of Dancehall, Reggae and Afrobeats which has allowed him to create a distinct sound recognised by many. Since his emergence, he has accumulated a massive following online with over 160 million views on YouTube. His debut album GOE released in 2016 peaked at #4 on the Billboard Reggae Charts, the same album which spawned another hit, No Kissing featuring Ghana’s Sarkodie. His urge to impact fans around the world through his culture has earned him some of the most prestigious awards including the Headies Award for The Next Rated Award and the Best New Act of The Year at the City People Entertainment Awards. Accolades continue to pile up for this charismatic performer, aside being awarded MTV Africa’s Song of the Year for My Woman My Everything, Patoranking was also crowned Best African artiste at the South African Music Awards in 2017. Undoubtedly one of the most culture shifting visionaries at the forefront of African music, he got featured on Major Lazer’s Particula from the Know No Better EP in 2018. And in the same year he toured with Ms Lauryn for her Miseducation for Lauryn Hill 20th Anniversary tour across North America as a special guest. He was recently announced as a recipient of the Forbes Africa 30 under 30 class of 2020, which is such a huge accomplishment for him.– @mthabisi_mthire.