The Chronicle Prosper Ndlovu and Nduduzo Tshuma in Hwange
ZIMBABWE is poised to join “Lion Economies” in the region — a nickname for Africa’s top growing economies — through developing an integrated mining and processing industry value chain model that will see the country consolidate domestic production and increasing high value exports. Guided by the US$12 billion mining target by 2023, a key component of the 2030 upper middle income vision, the country is already implementing several synergised projects that harmonise coal and coke production, gas and electricity generation, which are key enablers for critical industrial processes. President Mnangagwa and his delegation of ministers yesterday concluded his two-day tour of the several such investments in Hwange, Matabeleland North Province, which are expected to be a springboard for a diversified and inclusive economic growth. Coking coal is critical to the operationalisation of industrial furnaces mainly in industries that deal with ferrochrome and steel. President Mnangagwa’s visit thus anticipates the development of the economy in which forward linkages of an iron and steel industry, coking coal and hydro-carbons play a crucial role. Through the use of modern technology, the thermal gas emitted from coke batteries will be used for direct power generation, unlike the current situation where it’s being burnt off, or piped to power station generators as starter-power. Such projects need to be complemented with aggressive agricultural transformation that will ensure adequate food security and provision of critical raw materials for agro-processing industries, said the President. During the tour President Mnangagwa had the opportunity to get first-hand information and progress on the investments, which will see the country generating in excess of 3 000MW of electricity in the next few years with some of the projects already underway while some are in the pipeline. Adequate energy generation will not only help the country cut millions of dollars spent on power imports, but also create a favourable climate for increased investment across sectors. The President and his delegation visited Western Coal and Energy Company, a new mine, which will feed thermal coal to Zesa and is also planning to put up 600MW of power plant. Zambezi Gas is planning a 750MW power plant while ZZEE has started working on a 450MW project. Another investor, Jinan/Tutu, has also proposed a phased 600MW power plant. These are in addition to the 600MW Hwange Thermal Power Station units 7 and 8, which is being implemented at a cost of over US$1 billion. President Mnangagwa also visited South Mining’s brand new coke works where he officially commissioned the first 150 000 tonne/year coke battery plant. The company is set to start the second phase that will establish another 150 000 tonne coke unit. 