The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya Beitbridge Bureau The late Minister of Lands, Agriculture, Water, and Rural Resettlement, Perrance Shiri was instrumental in the revival of major irrigation projects in Matabeleland South province as part of the Government’s thrust to ensure food security countrywide. The late Minister also helped many farmers to transform livestock development initiatives under the command livestock initiative. This was said by Matabeleland South Zanu PF’s provincial chairman, Cde Rabelani Choeni soon after receiving news of the minister’s death. He said the nation had lost a revolutionary and a hard-working servant. “We have lost a very hard-working man who was not only a freedom fight but a cabinet minister,” said Cde Choeni. “You will note that most of our irrigation projects were on the verge of collapsing when Cde Shiri was appointed the Minister of Agriculture. Soon after assuming office, he has been one of the many people behind the revival of our agriculture sector. Through his efforts in line with our party election manifesto on increasing agriculture production, Agricultural and Rural Development Authority (ARDA) irrigation projects in Maphisa and Ingwizi (Plumtree) are now operating at capacity. “In addition, the Tuli Manyange and Makwe irrigation are taking shape. In Beitbridge he oversaw the take-off of the long-awaited 63km Zhovhe to Beitbridge (town) canal.” Cde Choeni said the initiative has already secured funding through the Governments of Zimbabwe and that of Kuwait. “The minister was very approachable and would give everyone an ear and was ready to take up all progressive ideas,” he said. The provincial chairman said besides enhancing crop production, Minister Shiri had a passion for livestock farming. He said a lot of farmers had upgraded their cattle breeds through the artificial insemination program introduced by Cde Shiri to add value to livestock in the area. Cde Choeni said some farmers also benefited from farming expos and engagements with the Minister who had the zeal to see everyone succeeding. “We are saddened by the loss of a man who was always hands-on and always on the ground with the farmers monitoring and capacitating them to produce more,” said the provincial chairperson.