The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
ZIMBABWEANS must exploit business opportunities in Mozambique and enhance the Second Republic’s economic diplomacy and help develop the country. Moreover, the existing ties between the two countries present a good environment for investment by corporates from the two neighbours. This was said by Zimbabwe’s Ambassador to Mozambique, Douglas Nyikayaramba, during a virtual market survey seminar held in the neighbouring country on Wednesday. He said there were a lot of investment opportunities that the Covid-19 situation presents for Sadc countries to increase trade and investment among themselves to improve the livelihoods of their citizens. “It is very important for our business people to understand that Zimbabwe and Mozambique enjoy very excellent and stable political relations, which are a sound basis to build strong business and trade relationships going forward,” said Amb Nyikayaramba. “Mozambique has over 31 million people, double the size of Zimbabwe and that presents a very huge market for our goods and services. “Therefore, for serious business people who are producing consumptive goods at home this is a market for Zimbabwe. It is producing low hanging fruits considering that the Second Republic’s model is economic diplomacy. “Additionally, this country is currently having a high rural population moving to urban areas and coastal cities and this naturally presents a market that will demand goods and services.” Amb Nyikayaramba said Mozambique has a coastline of 2500km with most of the beach fronts yet to be exploited and these are ideal for investment in tourism-related businesses. “There is also excellent tourism in this country, particularly in the Gorongoza area and there is a scope for partnerships in that area to realise improved tourists’ arrivals in the country,” he said.
Mozambique has similar economic pillars like Zimbabwe, which are in mining, manufacturing, agriculture, and tourism among others. As such, the Ambassador said businesses in both countries may have synergies, joint ventures, and strategic partnerships in these fields. He added that in July last year the late Agriculture Minister Perrance Shiri was able to seal a memorandum of understanding for private companies in the agriculture sector to enter into joint venture projects in the Gaza province to exploit 70 000 hectares of underutilised irrigation land. “As I have said that this is a huge consumptive market, there are so many goods coming from South Africa and other markets in Europe and Asia and yet Zimbabwe is very close by,” said Amb Nyikayaramba. “There are very few goods that are coming from Zimbabwe and yet Mozambique, given its huge population size, presents a very lucrative market for ourselves. “For instance, vegetables like carrots and cabbages, paprika and other perishables are being imported from as far as Johannesburg (1500km away) and yet we are a stone’s throw away and are not delivering anything. “All we need is to ensure that our roads between Rutenga and Sango Border Post are well maintained to expedite trade between Zimbabwe and Mozambique”. The Ambassador also said there were more investment opportunities in training, consultancy and providing expertise in Mozambique’s mining and manufacturing sectors given Zimbabwe’s strength. Both countries, he said, have got a lot of raw materials, goods, and services that can be turned into finished products. The Ambassador added that beneficiation will be cheaper to enter into in Zimbabwe where infrastructure was already available. “All you need is to bring in machinery considering that infrastructure is already in existence,” said Amb Nyikayaramba.