The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Most producers, be it music or film, often go unnoticed as only the face of the production gets all the acclaim. Those who would have put in the work behind the scenes are rarely given credit, yet, they are the drivers of most productions. This is the case with Neshville (real name Nyasha Nyika), a 31-year-old music producer at Rockup Studioz who has worked with most renowned artistes in the Matabeleland region including Iyasa, Madlela Skhobokhobo, Sandra Ndebele and Bolamba Culture Birds. Having started off as a rapper around 2005, Neshville said he wanted to have a role in the studio after being inspired by radio presenter Mjoks. “I started my music career when I was still in school. I was a rapper before I ventured into music production after being inspired by the likes of Mjoks and Father Tym. “In 2008, I started playing the bass guitar and worked with the likes of Sandra Ndebele, Ramsey Kays, Freddy Gwala and Derrick Majaivana. I later ventured into music production professionally and I was determined to stay in the studio as I had stints in Botswana from 2014 to 2016 where I worked with up-and-coming artistes in that country,” said Neshville. As fate would have it, Neshville returned to Zimbabwe where he was to interact with several renowned artistes and produce their works. “When I came back to Zimbabwe, I worked with and produced music for big artistes that include Khuxxman, Sotsha Moyo, Black Umfolosi, Iyasa, Asaph, Cal Vin, Bolamba Culture Birds, Madlela Skhobokhobo, Clement Magwaza, Godolude, Victory Siyanqoba and Msiz’kay. “Currently, I’m working with Madlela on his album called Ntikolotshi and Sotsha Moyo on a Tshikalanga album titled Gwendo,” he said. On how it has been working with big artistes, Neshville said: “It has been a great experience especially with artistes like Sotsha Moyo who have gone on international stages as I’ve learnt a lot from them, as well as Madlela and Khuxxman. “Through working with such artistes, I’ve also managed to improve my sound and create timeless music,” said Neshville. One of his greatest works, Neshville said is Madlela’s recent single titled Celebrate which featured Themba Boyoyo. The song made it big as it went straight to position one on Khulumani FM’s top 10 rhumba chart show of which five of the songs Neshville produced at Rockup Studioz. He said he also produced Khuxxman’s latest album titled Makhushukhushu which was released earlier this year. “Khuxxman gave me platform to produce something new for him because he liked my work so it inspired me to do even better. He also imparted his skills and I feel this is one of my best albums this year,” the producer said. Working with diverse artistes has benefitted the producer as he is now exposed to different genres. “Black Umfolosi taught me about Acapella music with the album I produced for them being received well in Austria by the record label they are signed under. This stamp of approval of my works also helped me know I was on the right track in terms of mixing and mastering,” he said. However, the lockdown, Neshville said has stalled him as some of the works have had to be put on hold. – @mthabisi_mthire.