The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Namibia-based music producer Shirati Drums has collaborated with contemporary musician Hwabaraty on a tribal house track called Bavuma saying if Sha Sha can grab a BET Award anything is possible. Known for the song Zolo that was a hit three or so years ago, Shirati Drums real name Shylow Mzamani (25) revealed that he has been working on various projects since he got back home from Namibia. The musician who grew up in Cowdray Park in Bulawayo said Bavuma will be released on Friday alongside the music video directed by creative producer and conceptual strategist Godwill Tasunga aka G-Factor and captured by Afri Arts, a media house in Bulawayo. The track and its video are expected to be released on Hwabaraty’s live Facebook page at 8PM and will feature Mr Zimbabwe, Ben Chest and Miss Tourism Bulawayo runner up Chipo Mandiudza. Shirati said Sha Sha’s win at the BET Awards at the weekend has inspired him to believe in the impossible. “If Sha Sha could grab a BET award, I believe it’s very much possible for anyone out there who is going to dare to believe and show dedication to their hustle,” said Shirati. “Music is my heartbeat, my only outlet, this is where I’m the most alive, it’s never really been about the money but my passion for the arts.” According to Shirati, Bavuma is a song: “. . . that echoes one’s realisation of purpose, it’s a song of acceptance, a breakthrough story cemented into sentimental up beat harmony and I cannot wait to share this musical experience with everyone. This is an uplifting Afro fusion song that could be played in any club in the world.” He said he was excited to have worked with Hwabaraty who added the Midas Touch to the track. Shirati who was nominated as the Outstanding Kwaito/House musician in 2017 started his music journey in 2012. After the hit song Zolo, he left Zimbabwe for Namibia. He was snapped up by a record label called Zee records, but his heart has always been at home. “After the release of my first debut single Zolo, my life was followed by a series of transformative events such as international recognition from one of the record labels in Namibia. I’m hopeful for a transformative arts industry. I love Zimbabwe and this will forever be my home, I only moved to Namibia after being signed by a record label called Zee records but home is where my heart is,” said Shirati.