The Chronicle When President Mnangagwa announced a new foreign policy thrust in November 2017 during his inauguration, many among us were sceptical. The new policy direction was a major deviation from the Look East Policy under former President Robert Mugabe. Following differences over the Land Reform Programme in 2000, hostile relations between Zimbabwe and the West became the order of the day. On the international arena, the former president made the headlines for his trademark attacks on Western nations and their leaders. On its part, the West made sure that sanctions paralysed the Zimbabwean economy as a strong message to the rest of the Global South. So, when President Mnangagwa stepped in and boldly declared that he would mend relations with the West as well as maintain comradeship with allies, many thought this was nothing but a wild dream. President Mnangagwa went further to proclaim a rapprochement policy when it comes to relations with financial institutions, including the World bank and International Monetary Fund. These institutions had stopped extending loans and other services to Zimbabwe as part of the Western strategy to bring the economy to its knees. Besides re-engagement, the President introduced to Zimbabwe, for the first time, economic diplomacy. All Zimbabwean embassies were given targets for foreign direct investment as well as bringing in tourists into the country. It is public knowledge that the global Covid-19 pandemic has adversely affected this strategy especially this year, but the President’s recent trip to Hwange District in Matabeleland North is testimony to the fact that the new foreign policy direction was never a futile dream. The fruits are bare for all to see, for all to taste. The President, on Thursday and Friday, embarked on a whirlwind tour of coal, gas and electricity companies. He visited Zimbabwe ZhongXin Coking Company (ZZCC), Afrochine’s associate Dinson Colliery, Jinan Coking Coal Project and South Mining Coking Coal Project, before officially launching the South Mining New Coking Project. He also visited JinAn/Tutu Coking Coal Project, Hwange Colliery Company’s Chaba Mine, Dinson Colliery, ZZCC Coke Plant, Zambezi Coal and Gas Mine, and Makomo Resources. He also toured the US$10 million 300MW Zimbabwe ZhongXin Electric Energy (ZZEE) power plant where a signing ceremony was conducted. The President also got to hear of future plans, for example, the Western Coal and Energy Company’s plans to build 2x300MW power plants in Hwange at a cost of US$1,2 billion, creating more than 1 000 jobs when fully operational. The electricity projects, together with the ongoing expansion at Hwange Thermal and Kariba Hydro, will see the country producing more electricity than it needs. The excess will be exported, bringing in much needed foreign currency. All the investments that the President toured are just in one province. One out of 10. And they are enough to steer the economy. Clearly, investors have confidence in Zimbabwe. They have confidence in President Mnangagwa and his Vision 2030. Where are all the cynics?