The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
IF you are curious to find out the reason why ladies cheat, then a new drama series titled Why Ladies Cheat set to premiere on July 7 could quench your interest. The series shot mostly in Bulawayo with other scenes in Harare will be premiered on the Pishavilla Communication YouTube page. Why Ladies Cheat features award winning actress and singer Qeqeshiwe ‘Qeqe’ Mntambo and Glam Award founder and actor Albert Prince Chigiya both as special guests. The lead cast members are Linda Ndlovu, Thabisile Ngwenya, Shevvone Mlauzi, Mbongeni Ngwenya, Tafadzwa Thabiso Maodzwa, Tavaka Matunha, Robert Matiza, Mthokozisi Ndlovu and Mzingaye Mbodiah. Why Ladies Cheat is created by Pishavilla Communication founder Matunha and Maodzwa. Matunha said they started shooting the production last month and will roll out the first episode next week as they have filmed three so far. “The series focuses on how ladies interact with diverse situations pertaining to matters to do with love. The stories will be told by ladies themselves. “We have shot three episodes from a target of twelve and we shot the series to promote a short film called Love Bites (21 days) that we are working on. This was also driven by the fact that we also wanted to stay creative during these trying times,” said Matunha. He said the series seeks to tell contemporary Zimbabwean stories and to inspire other creators out there that even in this Covid-19 crisis, they can still create stories that relate with people. “We will be releasing one episode per week and right now we will disseminate it on our YouTube page Pishavilla Communication,” he said. On how they managed to pull this together in light of the lockdown measures, Matunha said: “As per the health guidelines first of all we sanitised and checked the temperature of all the cast members in order to make sure that we didn’t put anyone at risk. We also had a limited number of people in one scene to also avoid any risks,” said Matunha. Why Ladies Cheat is a Pishavilla production in association with Veins Media. — @mthabisi_mthire.