The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
SOUTHERN Region women’s football league chairperson Takundwa Chimundiya said he is not aware of the US$500 000 Covid-19 bailout fund from Fifa which Zifa says it has started disbursing to regions. Zimbabwe Women’s Soccer League chairperson Barbra Chikosi said she could not answer on behalf of regions because her constituency was the 16 Super League Clubs, which she said have since received their share. She said the regional leagues which were the Southern and Northern, were directly under Zifa. Chikosi however said she was not aware how much the Super League clubs received. Chimundiya said he had not received any communication from Zifa and was still in the dark regading the bailout fund. Zifa communications manager Xolisani Gwesela told our Harare Bureau that the Covid-19 relief disbursements started last Friday and the Zimbabwe Women’s Soccer League received its allocation of nearly $4,9 million out of an allocation of US$500 000. Zifa is yet to disburse about $29,3 million to the regions and the Young Mighty Warriors (Under-20), who are set to take on Ethiopia in the World Cup qualifiers in September. They eliminated Malawi on a 2-1 aggregate score in February to set up a first-round clash with Ethiopia. “One thing you need to understand first is that I am in charge of 16 teams and all these teams were paid their money, which was deposited directly into their accounts. Until such time that we change the constitution of Zfa, I have no mandate to monitor what is happening in those regions,” said Chikosi. She said regions communicate directly with Zifa and the association was therefore in a position to know how the money was disbursed. Chimundiya insisted that there has not been any communication from Zifa. “As a region we are just in the dark like everyone. We just read in the papers that some money has been allocated to the regions yet nothing has been communicated to us. “We are still waiting for that communication even as we speak to you now,” said Chimundiya. Southern Region teams were taken aback yesterday when it was announced that Inline Academy will be one of the recipients of the funds despite the fact that the club has been defunct for more than two years. The Southern Region has 12 clubs, which all paid affiliation fees this year and were ready to get the ball rolling only to be stopped by the Covid-19 national lockdown which paralysed all sporting activities globally. Southern Region women’s football teams include ZRP Bulawayo, New Orleans, Highlanders Royals, Ubuntu Queens, Magwegwe Stars, Street Set, Sobukhazi Ladies, Biya and Friends Ladies Academy, Byo City Queens, Entumbane Ladies, Las Palmas and Mpopoma Queens.