The Chronicle Finally, the opposition and NGOs parties working in cahoots with some Western countries want to use their planned July 31 illegal demonstrations as an attempt to overthrow the Government. With cases of Covid-19 spiraling in the country, the opposition parties and their acolytes want to put the people into unnecessary risk by involving them in an illegal activity that could see more people infected with Covid-19. That the planned demos, like many others behind them, will fail, is not in doubt as Zimbabwe is a democracy where leaders are installed through elections and not sponsored acts of violence and chaos. Besides, the relevant arms of the law stand ready to carry out their mandate in the defence of the people and maintaining law and order. The greatest lesson, however, are the desperate lengths opposition parties and their handlers are prepared to go in pursuit of their illegal regime change agenda to the point of exposing innocent Zimbabweans to the deadly Covid-19. While all along the planned illegal demos had been touted as a march against corruption, Transform Zimbabwe leader Mr Jacob Ngarivhume, one of the orchestrators of the demos let the cat out of the bag on Sunday. “People are asking if @edmnangagwa and Zanu-PF do the sensible thing and step down to save millions of lives, who will take over? I want to stress that #31July is the people’s project. It should not be hijacked for political gain,” posted Mr Ngarivhume. “I believe the church and civil society will play an active role in facilitating the process of setting up a National Transitional Authority (NTA) that will guide Zimbabwe towards a new and exciting era.” Last week, Zanu-PF secretary of administration Dr Obert Mpofu said the ruling party was aware of the anti-establishment agendas by detractors through planned protests organised by MDC Alliance renegade like Tajamuka, the Front for Economic Emancipation of Zimbabwe being led by expelled party youth commissar Godfrey Tsenengamu and other media protagonists. “It is disconcerting that an individual was arrested in Kuwadzana printing our Zanu-PF and Central Intelligence Organisation cards. The level and sophistication of such an act points to the fact that there are leakages and gross breaches of our internal party systems which would be thoroughly investigated. “The court proceedings against the defendant should be followed so as to elicit the circumstances surrounding such a criminal intent and a threat to the security of the party,” said Dr Mpofu. Part of the strategies by the opposition parties and their allies have always been to drag the name of the security forces and Zanu-PF into the mud hence the printing of fake identity cards to try and link the institutions to their staged “excesses.” Reacting to Mr Ngarivhume’s post, the permanent secretary in the Ministry of Information Publicity and Broadcasting Services Mr Nick Mangwana said the attempt to overthrow a democratically elected Government was unconstitutional and lawlessness. “The cat is out the bag. It’s not about corruption. It’s an unconstitutional plan to seize power and give it to the unelected,” said Mr Mangwana. “If there was no #Covid19 catastrophe nobody would have a problem with an Anticorruption March. But to try to overthrow a constitutional order and replace it with an unelected monster is not democracy. It’s lawlessness. Democracy does not work that way.” Last Friday, President Mnangagwa warned rogue non-governmental organisations (NGOs), trade unions, churches and some foreign embassies against destabilising prevailing peace, unity and harmony through dabbling in politics, saying the ruling party will not allow such conduct. Addressing the Zanu PF Ordinary Session of the Politburo, at the party’s headquarters in Harare, the President said the Second Republic’s re-engagement efforts with all nations should never be mistaken for a sign of weakness, but signifies his Government’s commitment and value for international solidarity based on mutual respect. “We continue to see acts that seek to outrightly destabilise the peace, unity and harmony we are enjoying, in particular through the use of platforms in the health, education and security sectors. We shall never quiver or capitulate in the face of these machinations. Zanu PF is a Revolutionary Party, a party of liberation, a party with a rich ideology, history and a vision for the future. This character of our party is stronger than any challenge we may face no matter from what front or force,” said President Mnangagwa. “I urge those who purport to represent workers to do just that. It is a one-way traffic lane. Political ambitions and views belong to another lane. Choose the lane you walk on. Those in politics must seek the mandate of the people every five years, through the ballot box. That is the constitutional way, that is the rule of law way, that is the democratic way.” It is the duty therefore, for every peace loving Zimbabwean to stay away from the illegal activities of the opposition parties and stay safe to prevent transmission of Covid-19.