The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
THE Judicial Service Commission (JSC) has started a head-count of its staff countrywide to establish the size of its workforce. The audit is aimed at eliminating ghost workers in the commission, if any, by accounting for every staff member making sure none are both in JSC and Ministry of Justice, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs books. JSC last month celebrated 10 years of existence following complete separation of the administration of affairs of the judiciary from the Ministry and is carrying out the audit to make sure no Ministry staff are in the Commission books and also check for double dipping. Four teams were set up for the weeklong exercise which started on Monday to cover all JSC’s 69 stations in all provinces. In an interview at Victoria Falls Magistrates’ Courts on Tuesday, JSC spokesperson Ms Rumbidzai Takawira said the exercise will be completed tomorrow. “As the Judicial Service Commission, we have taken it upon ourselves to ensure that we deal with the issue ghost workers. Government as a whole is trying to deal with the issue to make sure it is not paying people who are not there or double-booking people. “What we are trying to do as JSC is ensuring that in our organisation everyone is accounted for and everyone is doing what they are supposed to be doing in whichever position they are supposed to be in,” said Ms Takawira. The team that was in Victoria Falls is carrying out the exercise in Matabeleland Region. After Victoria Falls it headed for Binga court and was expected to do the exercise in Hwange yesterday before moving to Lupane and Tsholotsho courts. The team will then move to Bulawayo metropolitan before winding up with courts in Matabeleland South today and tomorrow, said Ms Takawira. “We are going throughout the country this whole week as by the end of the week we will be done with the whole process. This is just one team dealing with Matabeleland region comprising Matabeleland North, Matabeleland South and Bulawayo Metropolitan provinces. We are looking at all our stations and we have got 69 stations across the country. “We have come here to the Magistrates’ Courts and the Sheriff offices and in Matabeleland North we are going to Binga, Lupane, Tsholotsho, Hwange to check on everything before moving to Bulawayo Metropolitan province and other surrounding districts and smaller towns, then go to Matabeleland South where we will end with Plumtree,” she said. Other teams are doing the exercise in Midlands, Manicaland, the three Mashonaland provinces and Harare. Ms Takawira could not be drawn into giving finer details about the whole process saying that would be done after the exercise. JSC’s Matabeleland North province covers Victoria Falls, Hwange, Binga, Lupane and Tsholotsho courts, with Nkayi and Inyathi being serviced by Bulawayo metropolitan. -@ncubeleon