The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
The Ferret team, made up of various security agencies, has intercepted a commercial truck carrying 19, 6 tonnes of suspected stolen telephone and electricity cables worth thousands of dollars which were being smuggled out of the country through Beitbridge Border Post. The owners of the contraband had allegedly made a false declaration to the customs authority (Zimra) indicating they were shipping out 7 tonnes of copper granules. The truck driver was arrested on Saturday as he was about to leave the country for South Africa. According to one security official, the truck was intercepted soon after going through mobile cargo scanning. The current mobile scanners use density to verify the consignment against information declared on the commercial Bill of Entry. “The vehicle was scanned and it imaged that a false declaration had been made,” said the border official. “The driver, who has since been arrested was followed as he was about to leave the country and the vehicle was taken for physical examinations. “It was then discovered that it was carrying 19.6 tonnes of scrap copper mostly telephone and electricity cables believed to have been stolen from TelOne and Zesa respectively. “The contraband and the South African registered truck have since been seized by Zimra under notice of seizure numbers 014147 and 014145 respectively.” The sources said the value of the copper was yet to be ascertained and that both TelOne and Zesa were still segregating the cables to establish the exact quantities belonging to them. The police officer commanding Beitbridge District, Chief Supt Tichaona Nyongo said he was yet to get more details on the matter. The smuggling of copper cables and related material is rife between Zimbabwe and South Africa, with those involved in this crime hiding the contraband mostly in false (trucks) compartments. A few months ago, authorities busted a racket of thieves who were besieging the burnt state warehouse at Beitbridge Border Post where they are targeting mostly copper cables and related products still trapped under the debris. In January last year, property worth approximately $190 000 was destroyed when the warehouse on the commercial exports section caught fire. The cause of the fire is still under investigation. It is also understood that the warehouse was loaded with an assortment of goods intercepted (from travellers) for non compliance with customs laws in the past 18 months. Investigations revealed that in most cases the suspects are apprehended by guards employed by a private security company hired by the Zimra. — @tupeyo