The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter THE Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Sport, Arts and Recreation says investigations will soon be launched to find out who did what during the 2014 African Union Sports Council Region Five Under-20 Youth Games and those found on the wrong side will face the music without fear or favour. Speaking in an interview after the committee’s tour of  Barbourfields Stadium in Bulawayo on Thursday, chairperson and Chivi North legislator Mathias Tongofa said they had noted that the auditors’ findings were largely adverse, an indication that some people did not do what was expected of them, hence the need for answers and investigations. A number of irregularities were unearthed by the auditors Deloitte and Touche, who were appointed by Cabinet in 2016 after then Minister of Sport and Recreation Makhosini Hlongwane raised the red flag. Officials from both the Government and local organising committee were accused of acting without due diligence on a lot of issues, including the diverting of US$1 million from the Games’ budget to Tokwe Mukorsi Dam, while a large chunk of funds were withdrawn from the bank without any relevant requisition orders and some remain unaccounted for to this date. This has been blamed for the non-payment of Bulawayo-based service providers and volunteers. Equipment such as the Photofinish at White City Stadium was removed and its whereabouts are unknown, while some items delivered after the games were allegedly taken by a director in the Ministry of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation. “Firstly we need to approach the Speaker of Parliament for him to summon the responsible Minister of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation Kirsty Coventry to come to Parliament and respond to the issues raised by the auditors and then after that all those implicated shall have their day. No one will be left regardless of their position or who they think they are close to. The media must also do their job and inform the nation accordingly. Let no one stand in their way or try to threaten them because even the President is on record denigrating corruption,” said Tongofa.