The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Chronicle Reporter
THE Judicial Service Commission (JSC) has suspended all operations at Western Commonage Magistrates Court in Bulawayo after a member of staff tested Covid-19 positive. Last week, all trials at the court were suspended after 12 public prosecutors, among them seven police officers attached to the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA), were placed on self-isolation for 14 days after one of them tested positive. In a Press statement yesterday, the JSC said all cases have been transferred to Bulawayo Magistrates’ Courts at the Tredgold Building. It said the move will allow for the decontamination of Western Commonage Magistrates Court. “The Judicial Service Commission (JSC) regrets to advise all stakeholders, legal practitioners and all litigants that effective Tuesday 28 July 2020, all operations at Western Commonage Magistrates Court in Bulawayo will be suspended until further notice. “The measure is a precaution taken to allow the decontamination of the premises after a member of staff at the station recently tested positive for Covid-19,” the statement said. The JSC said it is working with the Ministry of Health and Child Care to decontaminate the area so that it opens again. “The Commission wishes to further advise that during the period that Western Commonage Magistrates’ Court will be temporarily closed all litigants are required to appear at Bulawayo Magistrates’ Court at Tredgold Building on the dates that they were due in court,” said the JSC. The commission said the public can get in touch with its offices through the various communication platforms “For further assistance do not hesitate to get in touch with us through our website www.jsc.org.zw or alternatively email us on info@jsc.org.zw or call the Provincial Magistrate for Bulawayo Province on +263 712 867 027 or get hold of us on our social media platforms. The Commission’s handles on Twitter and Instagram are @JSCZim and Judicial Service Commission of Zimbabwe on Facebook,” it said. Magistrates’ courts at Western Commonage Court in Bulawayo have suspended all trials after 12 public prosecutors, among them seven police officers attached to the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA), were placed on self-isolation for 14 days after one of them tested positive for Covid-19. — @themkhust_ncube