The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
INEFFICIENT licensing of players’ agents and confusion between players’ agents and club representatives has led to a review of the player intermediaries’ system by Fifa. Also contributing to a raft of changes to the players’ agents system is their financial obligations. Zifa has started the official registration of players’ agents, with only five so far being found compliant. The newly registered player intermediaries are yet to be involved in any player transfers under the new method. Renowned agents George Deda and Gibson Mahachi are among the five registered people that are currently recognised as Zimbabwe’s only player intermediaries. Mahachi, who has strong links with South African teams, facilitated moves for Teenage Hadebe when he moved to Kaizer Chiefs from Chicken Inn, SuperSport United’s Evans Rusike as well as former Chippa United coach Norman Mapeza. Deda has been behind Zimbabwean players’ moves to Zambia, Tanzania and most recently West Africa where Tafadzwa Kutinyu plays for Horoya in Guinea. The other agents registered by Zifa are Gerald Maguranyanga, Colin Zilali and Charles Jones. In a statement, Zifa said: “Following the reform of the players’ agents system to the efficient and transparent intermediary system by the Federation of International Football Associations (Fifa), the Zimbabwe Football Association (Zifa) has adopted the new approach.” According to fifa.com, key elements of the player intermediary system include transparency, full disclosure and publication of the remuneration. Payments made to intermediaries as a result of transactions that they are involved in for international transfers and further details must be inserted into Fifa’s Transfer Matching System. In the past, player agents were dodging the process of revealing the financial details of deals, with some clubs skeptical of dealing with some player intermediaries. “Payment of intermediary fees: identifying which entity (clubs or players) are responsible for paying intermediary fees and what percentage intermediaries are paid. Conflicts of interest: proper disclosure if any conflicts of interest by all parties involved. “Protection of minors: non-payment of commission if the player concerned is a minor,” reads the Fifa statement. — @ZililoR.