The Chronicle Nduduzo Tshuma, Political Editor
THE Government has been hailed for emphasising that companies engaged in coal projects in Hwange prioritise community development projects. President Mnangagwa last week conducted a two-day tour of coal projects in the district where he called companies to walk the talk in their projects and more importantly community development. Some of the things President Mnangagwa called for was the employment of locals, building of schools, roads, clinics and the provision of clean water among others. Matabeleland North Minister for Provincial Affairs and devolution Richard Moyo said the President’s emphasis on community development shows the Government’s seriousness in the emancipation of the people.
President Mnangagwa has said that in the Second Republic, no area in Zimbabwe should be left behind in terms of development. “We are happy because that is what we wish for, as we see companies rising, it should also translate to the growth of Hwange. The development of Hwange should be a priority and it should not be only the companies making profits but also benefit locals by giving them jobs and contracting local companies to benefit also,” said Minister Moyo. “I’m happy about the employment that the companies have created because when we calculate so far more than 6 000 locals have been employed by the companies and the number will rise as they expand their operations. “The traditional leaders have over the years lamented that some companies were not forthcoming when it comes to community development projects like schools and roads and clinics and now that the President has visited and emphasised on country development, the hope that those companies who were lagging behind will come to the party.” Minister Moyo also called on the companies to consider the environment in their operations and follow the country’s environmental laws. Chief Nekatambe said while established companies were contributing to community development programmes, some new players were lagging behind and hoped that they would heed the President’s call. “It’s very welcome indeed, he was telling them that they develop the communities. We hope they will take heed. Now that the President has come, we hope some of them will change. I have visited some companies and told them of the people’s complaints and they would say they are still pouring in money and yet to reap benefits and they will start delivering their promises,” said Chief Nekatambe, who attended the President’s tour. “The other established companies like Makomo, Zambezi Coal and Gas and Hwange Colliery Company Limited have been ploughing back to the communities. They have built schools and many other things and we hope that the new players will follow suit. I’m happy that the President’s visit will bring a lot of change.” Chief Hwange, who also attended the tour, said: “This is what development is about and we are so happy that the President emphasised that the companies must also look at the development of the communities.” A Hwange resident, Mr Zack Mahupete, also welcomed the President’s call. “They should build supporting infrastructure like what the likes of Ngezi Platinum Mine are doing. “Most of the infrastructure here was either bult by Hwange Colliery Company or Zesa so those new companies need to complement what has been done by those two companies. My wish is that those companies actually first establish supporting infrastructure before they start operations,” he said.