The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Artistes in Gwanda are set to partake in skills training and capacity building workshops as part of efforts to develop them and in turn, grow the arts industry in the area. Through the Talent Innovation Mentorship Exercise (TIME), a project that is expected to be launched next month, efforts to make Gwanda a cultural hub will also be scaled up. Speaking from Gwanda, TIME executive director, Adrian ‘Drivo’ Musa said the project will act as a career boost for up-and-coming artistes including dancers, musicians, producers, actors and fine artistes. “The TIME project’s objectives are to establish comprehensive entrepreneurial support strategies to assist the up-and-coming artistes in terms of arts management and production. “This can be done by building capacity, confidence and competence of the artistes through professional skills training, capacity building, coaching and mentorship programmes,” said Drivo. He said so far, they have identified 25 artistes and groups that will undergo a series of skills training and capacity building workshops where experts have been engaged to facilitate the workshops. “The artistes we’ll be training include Reflection Street Movers, Good Fellas, Cutie G, Sbhevara, Zaggoe, Lokshin Theatre, Jahunda Community Arts, Bry, Zhezhingtonz, Skollah, X Studios and PM Records record labels, Gwanda Magazine, AfriCulture, Kadder and Khoikhoi,” he said. “Arts activities are dead (in Gwanda). Festivals are planned from outside (the town) and imposed without the indigenous people’s input. The successful implementation of the initiative will bring the value of innovativeness and uniqueness within the creative sector. “More quality works mainstreaming into festivals and other platforms and spaces are the end goals which will also go on to boost other sectors like tourism and commerce,” he said. “The province has over 100 talented artists and groups who have long lacked productive exposure and talent promotion avenues. A handful have maneuvered and made it to sound arts platforms. “Notably worrisome is the short-lived projects of the likes of SCAPFEST festival by Linkfest in 1996 – 1999, Rainbow Arts Festival and Jahunda Community Arts festival which have vanished because of lack of sound community foundations and sustainability plans,” said Drivo. He added that they have submitted project proposals to potential funders and hopefully they will get support so that they uplift the standard of the abundant talent in Matabeleland South. “We’re also in the process of signing an MoU with the Municipality of Gwanda on the permanent use of the culture centre which is currently still under construction. Already, we have acquired the full use of Jahunda Community Hall. “Our partnership with the Municipality of Gwanda is a great stride towards the development of the arts in Gwanda and we’re grateful to the Mayor and his team,” he said. Through working closely with the Gwanda Municipality, the artistes recently united and held their first virtual music show which was streamed live on social media. — @mthabisi_mthire.