The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
ZIMBABWEAN hospitality group, Africa Albida Tourism (AAT), says it has put in place adequate safety measures in compliance with recommended health protocols as it re-opens some of its facilities. AAT, which has a number of properties in Victoria Falls, namely Victoria Falls Safari Lodge, Victoria Falls Safari Club, Victoria Falls Suites, Lokuthula Lodges, and the Boma-Dinner and Drum Show, is one of the leading players in the country’s tourism sector. The group closed its facilities in March and re-opened on Thursday last week following Government decision to partly open the tourism sector by allowing game parks, restaurants and safaris to re-open for domestic clients. A number of other hoteliers and eateries have also started re-opening while some are still working on new packages and rates before they resume business. This comes as MARS is offering free testing to the industry players after it acquired 600 test kits as part of its corporate social responsibility. The test kits are to be utilised for the safety of the destination. In a statement, AAT operations manager Mr Andy Conn said the industry should ensure safety of guests by eliminating chances for any spread of the coronavirus. “Having had ample time to view the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic unfolding around the world, the hospitality group has evolved its health and safety protocols in accordance with World Health Organisation (WHO) guidelines. “While we appreciate the dramatic impact of the pandemic and the need to adopt new protocols, we would ultimately like to ensure the guest experience is affected as little as possible and a natural safari getaway can still be enjoyed. “New protocols will include the temperature screening of guests and staff, the regular sanitization of facilities, availability of sanitisers, controlled staff and guess interaction and ongoing staff training and education to identify risk and mitigate the spread of the virus,” said Mr Conn. The hospitality group has appointed a health and safety officer whose role will be to make ensure adherence to health protocols in compliance with set guidelines and prevention of the pandemic. AAT chief executive Mr Ross Kennedy said the group partially re-opened last Friday, with eight Lokuthula Lodges, the Victoria Falls Safari Club central building along with eight rooms as well as two Victoria Falls Safari Suites now operational. “We are so pleased to be able to open for business after being closed for 100 days. It follows the re-opening of the Rainforest. For the morale of the hospitality people, it could not have come soon enough. “We look forward to welcoming guests back to the estate, albeit with only parts of the business operating,” said Mr Kennedy. He said AAT had come up with exciting special packages for the Zimbabwe market and already has enquires and bookings. “We shall monitor demand, access and borders as the region awakens, then gradually open more of the property. We look forward for the day when all air and road access if open again so that this natural wonder of the world the Victoria Falls, can be seen by all. -@ncubeleon