The Chronicle Andile Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
THE country’s Covid-19 cases have surpassed the 1 000 mark, with health experts warning people not to throw caution to the wind as local transmissions are on the rise. On Monday, 49 new Covid-19 positive cases were recorded bringing the total number of cases to 1 034 as the death toll rose to 19 on that day. Bulawayo Province recorded five new cases bringing the total number of cases in the province to 188. The Ministry of Health and Child Care said all the new cases have been put under isolation. Nine cases, including one death were reported in the Midlands Province, bringing to 92 the total number of cases in the province. 343 people have so far recovered from the virus. Bulawayo provincial medical director Dr Welcome Mlilo urged Bulawayo residents to heed the call to stay at home if they have no essential errands as local transmissions are on the rise. He said people must not throw caution to the wind as they risk exposure to Covid-19. Dr Mlilo said it was the duty of residents to meet Government halfway and act responsibly in order to protect themselves and others from the virus. “Covid-19 cases are rising in the country and so is the death toll. We are at a time when a lot of personal responsibility is required in order for one to stay safe and also to protect others. For instance, when you are wearing a mask, you are protecting yourself and also the next person. Also, when you choose to stay at home, if you have no essential business outside of home, you are protecting yourself and others too. Some of the Covid-19 cases are as a result of people failing to take full responsibility,” said Dr Mlilo. “While infections are inevitable at some point, it cannot be ruled out that some people will be infected just because they are not bothered to care and to exercise caution when in public spaces. “This is evident in the manner in which most people are carrying themselves around in public spaces. It is unfortunate that is how people are behaving, but it is dangerous. People must not wait for heavy lockdown announcements to start behaving in a manner that is in line with the situation we are having.”