The Chronicle Fungai Muderere, Senior Sports Reporter
CHICKEN Inn captain Moses Jackson takes no prisoners on the pitch even at the age of 37. If there was an award for the most aggressive player, he would be a serial winner as he’s in the same mould with ex-Dynamos defenders Kaitano Tembo, James Matola and former Amazulu hardman Herbert Dick. Jackson is endowed with a superior ball winning ability, vision, composure, an exceptional first touch and balance. Nicknamed Black Shark, the Gweru-bred Jackson has seen it all and at his age coupled with the position that he plays, many would think the aging player would be hanging his boots. The Shark however still believes he still has a lot to offer and teach some players 10 years his junior, a thing or two about the game. “I’m not stopping anytime soon. I’m a hard worker and the fact that I still have a running contract with Chicken Inn means the coaches have seen that my legs can still carry me. I believe I can still produce the best for my team. I still have the power and zeal to shut out a number of youthful strikers in the local Premiership,” said the soft-spoken defender. Former Highlanders forward Graham Ncube testifies about Jackson’s aggression. “His presence on the field of play was always intimidating to me. He is a rock-solid defender and has continued to prove that he is a true leader. Jackson is a committed and forceful defender that is hard to beat either in the air or on the ground,” said Ncube, who was part of Bosso’s 2012 squad. Even Bosso assistant coach Mandla “Lulu” Mpofu speaks highly of Jackson’s belligerence and says that’s what he admires about the central defender. “Jackson’s body stature says it all. He is always hard to beat. To be frank, week in week out I have seen many players playing second fiddle to him. Despite his age, Jackson has proved to be an asset to Chicken Inn. Besides the several trademarks of a defender, he has ideal leadership qualities,” said Mpofu. Having joined the Gamecocks in 2012 from the now defunct Hardbody, Jackson now marshals a team that has his equally gifted age mate Clemence Matawu, the free-scoring Obriel Chirinda, roving veteran trio Xolani Ndlovu, Passmore Bernand, Guide Goddard and Sipho Ndlovu as well as goalkeepers Donovan Bernard and Pride Zendera, among others.