The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
SOUTHERN Region Premier Soccer League governors on Saturday told Zifa president Felton Kamambo to rein in one of his chief, whom they accused of being a toxic figure, especially in association with vice-president Gift Banda’ case. The governors told Kamambo that the football landscape was now on a slippery slope due to named administrator and another unnamed executive committee member, who is alleged to have moved a motion to get Banda suspended. Kamambo, according to sources, accepted what he said was “a very unfortunate and embarrasing manner” in the way that the Bulawayo businessman’s case has been handled. Zifa’s persistent appeals in Banda’s case are believed to be fronted by one individual. “It wasn’t really a confrontational approach by the Southern Region folks. They (just) demanded to know why the association was spending money and time on unnecessary appeals when it was clear that Gift Banda never breached any laws. It was a candid point by the Southern Region and amazingly, all the governors supported it, probably an indication that people were not happy. To his credit, Kamambo acknowledged and said he will look into the matter. He apologised for the manner the issue has been handled,” said a source. “Governors reminded him that when he assumed power, he said bygones would be bygones and the era of suspensions was over and asked why he was persecuting Banda. His response, which is a sobering fact for our football, charmed the governors.” Ahead of the meeting, a well placed source had told Chronicle Sport that the agenda of the meeting was for Zifa to sell its gospel to the governors, following reports that some councillors had set in motion a petition to recall the Zifa executive committee over a cocktail of charges that include rampant violation of the constitution. Meanwhile, the PSL governors reportedly refused to accept the Fifa Covid-19 bailout fund in local currency and told Zifa to deposit the money in foreign currency into the PSL account.