The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE rise in Covid-19 cases in Bulawayo and Harare has forced Zimbabwe Cricket (ZC) to abort training programmes for national team players that had been preparing for the Afghanistan series in the two cities. ZC decided to break the training camp on Tuesday, with its communications manager Darlington Majonga saying the players have been given programmes to follow at home. Cricket had been given the green light to resume training during the Covid-19 lockdown. As per the International Cricket Council guidelines, the use of saliva on cricket balls was prohibited and all players as well as ZC employees have been provided with face masks and alcohol-based sanitisers for training sessions. The senior national men’s team had been training for the past month while awaiting Government approval to host Afghanistan for a limited overs series this month to next month. Bulawayo-based national team players that tested negative for Covid-19 had been training under the guidance of former national team fast bowler and Bulawayo provincial coach Njabulo Ncube at Queens Sports Club. Before resuming training at the beginning of June following a lengthy suspension of sporting activities due to the Covid-19 pandemic, ZC organised that all the 37 shortlisted cricketers, as well as coaching staff undergo coronavirus tests. Due to lockdown restrictions, the training pool was split into small sub-groups that are practising in their provinces. The players focused on strength and conditioning sessions for the first three weeks before switching to skills training. Zimbabwe were meant to host Afghanistan from this month to next month for a five-match T20I series. Latest statistics released by the Ministry of Health and Child Care show that Zimbabwe now has over 2 000 confirmed Covid-19 cases, which include 510 recoveries and 26 deaths. Bulawayo is the pandemic’s epicentre, with 593 cases followed by Harare with 579. Majonga said ZC remains hopeful that the Afghanistan tour will proceed. “The July to August timeline was just a tentative date. The dates for the tour will be determined by Government’s response. We wrote to Government and are waiting for their response. As ZC and ACB, we are ready for the series,” said Majonga. Afghanistan went into a month-long training camp preparing for the series. The Asians included captain Asghar Afghan, Rashid Khan, Mohammad Nabi and Mohammad Shahzad in the 22-man squad. During camp, the Afghanistan Cricket Board held a Covid-19 awareness meeting for players and other relevant officials in Kabul to educate them about health guidelines to be maintained during the camp.
Zimbabwe squad Brian Chari, Christopher Mpofu, Ainsley Ndlovu, Charlton Tshuma, Sean Williams, Faraz Akram, Ryan Burl, Sikandar Raza, Chamunorwa Chibhabha, Elton Chigumbura, Craig Ervine, Kyle Jarvis, Tinashe Kamunhukamwe, Neville Madziva, William Mashinge, Peter Joseph Moor, Brian Mudzinganyama, Ryan Murray, Brendan Taylor, Regis Chakabva, Luke Jongwe, Wessly Madhevere, Timycen Maruma, Wellington Masakadza, Prince Masvaure, Tapiwa Mufudza, Tinotenda Mutombodzi, Richmond Mutumbami, Richard Ngarava, Victor Nyauchi, Brandon Mavuta, Carl Mumba, Tendai Chisoro, Tendai Chatara, Kevin Kasuza, Donald Tiripano. — @ZililoR.