The Chronicle Melissa Mpofu
ONE of the leading airlines, Emirates, has become the first in the world to offer free, global cover for Covid-19-related costs. The development will see the airline covering medical expenses of up to EUR150 000 (approx. US$173 991) and quarantine costs of EUR100 (approx. US$116) per day for 14 days, should their passengers be diagnosed with Covid-19 during their travel while they are away from home. This cover is set to be provided by the airline, free of cost to its customers. The cover for Covid-19-related medical expenses and quarantine costs will be offered to all its passengers regardless of class of travel or destination. “This cover is immediately effective for customers flying on Emirates until 31 October, 2020 (first flight to be completed on or before 31 October 2020). It is valid for 31 days from the moment they fly the first sector of their journey. This means Emirates customers can continue to benefit from the added assurance of this cover, even if they travel onwards to another city after arriving at their Emirates destination,” Emirates said in a statement. Customers do not need to register or fill in any forms before they travel, and they are not obligated to utilise this cover provided by Emirates. “Any impacted customer who has been diagnosed with Covid-19 during their travel simply has to contact a dedicated hotline to be availed assistance and cover.” Sheikh Ahmed bin Saeed Al Maktoum, Emirates Group chairman and chief executive said: “Under the directive of His Highness Sheikh Mohammed, UAE Vice President and Prime Minister and Ruler of Dubai, Emirates is proud to lead the way in boosting confidence for international travel. “We know people are yearning to fly as borders around the world gradually reopen, but they are seeking flexibility and assurances should something unforeseen happen during their travel.” He added: “Emirates has worked hard to put in place measures at every step of the customer journey to mitigate risk of infection, and we have also revamped our booking policies to offer flexibility. We are now taking it to the next level, by being the first in the industry to offer our customers free global cover for Covid-19 medical expenses and quarantine costs should they incur these costs during their travel. “We are putting our customers first, and we believe they will welcome this initiative.” Meanwhile, with the gradual reopening of borders, Emirates has revised its booking policies to offer customers more flexibility and confidence to plan their travel. Customers whose travel plans were disrupted by Covid-19-related flight or travel restrictions, according to the airline, should hold onto their ticket, which will be valid for 24 months and rebook to fly at a later time; request travel vouchers to offset against future Emirates purchases, or request refunds via an online form on Emirates’ website or via their travel booking agent. Emirates serves over 60 destinations in its network, facilitating travel between the Americas, Europe, Africa, the Middle East and the Asia Pacific through a connection in Dubai for customers across the world. The airline is yet to resume operations in Zimbabwe.