The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Court Reporter
THE trial of six police officers who allegedly brutalised two Cowdray Park suburb women for allegedly violating lockdown regulations, kicked off yesterday at the Western Commonage Magistrates’ Courts after their application for exception was dismissed. Western Commonage magistrate, Ms Gladmore Mushove on Tuesday ruled that the reasons for exception cited by the accused persons’ lawyers were not justified. Simbarashe Bvekwa (26), Tichaona Zariro (34), Patson Gumoreyi (30), Elizabeth Denhere (41), Zibusiso Masuku (27) and Christabel Munyondo (28) who are all members of the Zimbabwe Republic Police (ZRP) appeared before Ms Mushove facing assault charges. They were remanded to July 28 for continuation of trial. The accused persons allegedly handcuffed and assaulted two women, siblings aged 30 and 36 years after they had gone to the shops to buy some foodstuffs on April 16. The two women had to seek medical treatment after allegedly being brutally assaulted for hours with batons on their backs, hips and legs by the police officers who accused them of violating the ongoing national lockdown. The officers allegedly detained the women overnight at Cowdray Park police base after refusing to let them pay fines. In their defence, through their lawyer, Mr Maclean Mahaso of Tanaka Law Chambers said the charges levelled against them were framed, and argued that the complainants acted in an unbecoming manner towards them on the day in question. “My clients were on an assignment to maintain lockdown regulations in Cowdray Park on the day in question. When they arrived at TM supermarket there was a long queue for mealie-meal. The complainants were standing at a distance from the queue,” said Mr Mahaso. “The police officers ordered people to either join the queue in an orderly manner or go home and at that point, the complainants started to protest and shouted obscenities and other abusive words at the accused persons.” Mr Mahaso said the accused persons sought to apprehend the two complainants but they fled and were blocked at the entrance of the TM Supermarket by they were blocked. “The complainants were blocked from gaining entry by members of staff at the supermarket. The six accused persons took the complainants and advised them that they had been placed under arrest,” he said. Mr Mahaso said his clients took the complainants to Cowdray Park police base where they were detained. “They expressly admitted their criminal behaviour which culminated in their payment of fine of $200 each and left the base,” he said. Prosecuting, Mr Kenneth Shava, said on April 16 this year, the two women met the police officers and they stopped them and demanded to know where they were coming from during the lockdown period. The complainants told the accused persons that they were coming from a butchery to buy meat. The court heard that the accused persons grabbed the complainants and hit them with a baton several times on their buttocks. In the process, one of the complainants’ cellphone, which was in her back pocket was damaged. “The accused persons took turns to assault the two women on their buttocks and hips several times, insulting them with obscenities. They then handcuffed and force marched to the Cowdray Park police base where they released them the following day after paying a fine of $200 each,” said Mr Shava. A report was made to the police leading to the arrest of the six accused persons following an identification parade. The complainants alleged cops picked them out from a queue at the supermarket and cuffed their hands behind their backs. The officers allegedly force-marched the victims through a bush to Cowdray Park Police Base, making frequent stops along the way to beat them with batons. @mashnets