The Chronicle Companies and institutions should adapt quickly to the “new normal” which requires most workers to operate from home as part of measures to minimise the spread of Covid-19. Workplaces have become epicentres for the spread of the virus hence the urgent need for companies to work out modalities to reduce the number of workers that converge at the workplace. Working from home has many positives for both the company and employees. What companies have to do is to put systems in place to make the employees as productive as possible while operating from home. There are however some jobs that require workers to be at the workplace and in such cases, measures should be taken to minimise exposure to Covid-19 by strictly adhering to all health protocols. Government in response to a spike in Covid-19 cases witnessed during the past few weeks, on Tuesday imposed a dusk to dawn curfew as part of measures to tighten lockdown regulations. Business operating hours which had been relaxed reverted to the initial 8am-3pm when lockdown was introduced on March 30. Public gatherings have been banned including church services and only a limited number of people are allowed to attend funerals. The Government said only those providing essential services are allowed in town and inter-city travel remains banned. These raft of Government measures meant to curb the spread of the pandemic should be complemented by companies and institutions through putting in place systems that enable most employees to operate from home. Workers from some companies started operating from home immediately when Government introduced the lockdown on March 30 and what these companies just need to do is to perfect the systems. We have already alluded to the fact that workplaces have become epicentres of Covid-19 and as such workers have become a threat to their families. The Covid-19 pandemic has forced companies and organisations to adopt new ways of conducting meetings which are likely to be the norm post Covid-19. Virtual conferences are now the new norm and organisations have discovered that they do not need to converge at a conference centre for a meeting or conference. Virtual meetings or conferences have resulted in massive savings for companies and organisations that are no longer spending money on accommodation, transport and food for delegates or company employees. The other positive of virtual meetings is that exposure to Covid-19 is minimised as people need not converge at one place. We want to once again implore companies to invest in systems to enable workers to work from home so that we reduce the number of workers at the workplace to enable them to maintain social distancing. In the event workers have to report at the workplace, it must be very safe so that workers do not put their families at risk as is the case at many companies and institutions now. The transport to work and back should not expose workers to the virus hence the need for companies to provide transport.