The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
CABINET has been commended for rescheduling the reopening of schools to a later date while authorities are being challenged to use the window period to adequately prepare learning institutions for safety under the Covid-19 environment. The Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education had announced staggered reopening of schools last month with Grade 7, Form Four and Form Six classes expected to open first on July 28. But a spike in Covid-19 cases, including local transmissions, saw Cabinet on Tuesday deferring schools opening to a later date. The country has recorded 1 064 confirmed cases including 343 recoveries and 20 deaths. Government also announced that lockdown measures will be tightened in hotspots such as Bulawayo where more local transmissions are being reported. Zimbabwe Teachers Association (Zimta) chief executive officer Dr Sifiso Ndlovu said the Cabinet decision was informed by science and is commendable. He said education stakeholders should collectively work towards a safe reopening of schools. “As teachers we are grateful that they have accepted one view that it was not the right time to reopen schools and their decision has been informed by science. So, we are happy that they have responded now we have to get Government and the rest of the stakeholders into an active discussion so that when that time of the opening comes, we will be ready to do so,” he said. Dr Ndlovu said the 2020 education year could be a write off if there is no adequate preparation towards reopening of schools. He said the safe reopening of schools should not just be a responsibility for Government but teachers, parents, development partners and the rest of society. Parents told Chronicle that it was too early to reopen schools considering Covid-19 cases that are increasing daily. Miss Michelle Mateko from Nketa 9 said Cabinet’s decision to shelve schools reopening was welcome. “It would have been dangerous if schools were allowed to reopen this month end. If you are following global news you might have noticed how Covid-19 has had devastating effects in countries with very good health care systems such as America and Italy. What more of us? So, I believe the Cabinet decision is the correct decision. School children share a lot of things and they might not even practice social distancing or wear protective gear. So, I believe the decision was in the children’s best interest,” said Miss Mateko. She said elders are struggling to comply with Covid-19 regulations and it could be worse for pupils. Mr Sipho Moyo from New Lobengula said he preferred schools to remain closed until a vaccine was found. “It’s better for children to lose out on their studies as opposed to reopening schools and getting infected. School children because of their nature might touch so many surfaces and expose themselves to Covid-19. Although there is a need to progress educationally, Cabinet’s decision might save their lives as well as that of teachers as Covid-19 cases are on the increase in the country,” said Mr Moyo. Another resident, Mr France Mhlanga from New Lobengula suburb said, the virus was spreading fast and children could be exposed in schools. Mr Mhlanga said his children are attending online classes so that they do not regress in their studies. Mr Lazarus Mpofu from Nkulumane said schools should prepare for reopening, despite the Covid-19 pandemic’s devasting impact. “This is a difficult period for every country but we have to move on. We have children who are expected to be sitting for public examinations this year. They have not learnt anything and schools remain closed. I think we should adjust accordingly because life has to move on. We should consider that Covid-19 might be with us for a very long time,” said Mr Mpofu. -@nqotshili