The Chronicle Andile Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
GOVERNMENT has established 32 Rapid Response Teams in Bulawayo and Harare to deal with Covid-19 infections in the cities which have the highest number of cases in the country. In the past week, local transmission cases went up from 791 to 1 426, while the cumulative figure shot from 1 611 to 2 512. During a media briefing on the work of the Covid-19 inter-ministerial taskforce yesterday, Minister of Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Monica Mutsvangwa said Government was embarking on nationwide visits meant to address province-specific challenges and evaluate localised Covid-19 responses. The Minister said Government was also concerned about the high numbers of border jumpers and smuggling at the country’s borders. “In order to expand testing and contact tracing in hotspot areas, the Ministry of Health and Child Care has established 32 Rapid Response Teams in Harare and Bulawayo,” said Minister Mutsvangwa. She said citizens who issued information on Covid-19 test results without authorisation have created hubs of misinformation and created panic that affects efforts to respond to the pandemic. The Minister said only the Permanent Secretary for Health and Child Care was mandated to communicate results. “The National Taskforce noted the progress in the rehabilitation and renovation of identified isolation centres, with some facilities now complete and already admitting mild cases and those cases that cannot self-isolate in their homes. The taskforce noted with concern continued cases of illegal border crossers, but it commends responsible citizens who are apprising the police and health officials of these potential threats to local communities. “The National Taskforce noted that the cumulative number of confirmed cases has risen by 56 percent in the past week from 1 611 to 2 512 while the cumulative number of confirmed local cases has risen by 80 percent from 791 to 1 426. “Most of the local cases are in Bulawayo (615), Harare (488) and Gweru (159), Midlands Province over the past week,” said Minister Mutsvangwa. The Minister said Government was working on ensuring that water availability was prioritised as water was a critical need in the fight against Covid-19. She said borehole rehabilitation works were underway, with 107 boreholes having been rehabilitated to date. “Water remains a critical element in the fight against Covid-19 and Government continues to truck bulk water to areas where there is urgent need, while the drilling and rehabilitation of boreholes continues. This past week, a total of 107 boreholes were rehabilitated nationwide by Government and partners who responded to the appeal by His Excellency. “The Taskforce was informed that efforts to address water supply challenges to Bulawayo, which was recently hit by a diarrhoea outbreak, are progressing. On a positive note, works on the Nyamandlovu aquifer have been completed and water supply improved from 3 Mega litres per Day to 10 Mega litres per Day,” said the Minister. — @andile_tshuma