The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
Internet sensation, Mai TT, real name Felistas Edwards on Sunday shocked many who doubted her singing prowess after she brought her A-game and put up a well-choreographed act at a virtual show that was shown on the Nash TV Facebook page. Widely known for her comedy skits and rants on social media, Mai TT who has been trending online of late after her public clash with Passion Java, was invited to perform on the Nash TV Sunday Night Live platform so as to expose her singing talent while entertaining the masses. Upon hearing that Mai TT would be staging an exclusive show as a musician on the platform that has unearthed so many artistes, some were sceptical as they felt Mai TT did not have what it takes to perform as a main actas they had never seen her perform. And when the time came for her to take to the stage, comments like “I’m developing a stage fright on behalf of Mai TT”, “does she have enough songs to sustain a show” started rolling as people clearly doubted her. But, never one to fear challenges, something that she made evident after taking on Passion Java, Mai TT had things figured as she took charge of the mic and stage and acted like she owned them. Like a real superstar, she took to the stage clad in what seemed like a ninja outfit. A full band complete with dancers and backing vocalists was already on standby and a jovial Mai TT got things started with what sounded like a gospel/love track. She effortlessly engaged with her virtual audience and had a lot of energy which saw people warming up to her. From gospel, to love jams to dancehall, Mai TT showed her diversity and some even compared her to the late Brenda Fassie because of her appearance and high energy. To show how talented she is, Mai TT’s songs were very simple as they were of things she encounters in her day to day life. One of the songs was a dedication to her Facebook lover Eddie whom she said used to send her money from abroad but sadly, he just vanished on her. The other was a heartbreak song, Letting you go, likely dedicated to her ex-lover, Zizoe whom she broke up with recently. Her last track, a dancehall tune got her a standing ovation as she raised the bar very high with the catchy song. On the song, she merely sang about being a pacesetter and free spirited person who is unfazed by her HIV status. So hyped up were people in the studio that their energy was felt by those at home, that was the power of Mai TT and artistes can learn a lot from her especially on issues to do with crowd engagement, ownership of the stage and choreography. With top notch backing vocalists and very good dancers who were choreographed by John Cole, Mai TT definitely made her mark and left naysayers with an egg on their faces. 