The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
THE police and army have expressed worry over conditions at quarantine centres as the state of affairs makes it easy for Covid-19 to spread. People returning to Zimbabwe from other countries are first placed under quarantine as part of measures to stop the spread of the virus. Most of the Covid-19 positive cases being recorded in the country are of Zimbabweans returning home from South Africa, Botswana, the United Kingdom, US and other countries. More than 200 people have escaped from quarantine centres which puts communities at risk of contracting Covid-19. Zimbabwe Republic Police (ZRP) and the Zimbabwe National Army (ZNA) representatives have since expressed concern over conditions at quarantine centres. Speaking during a Matabeleland South provincial Covid-19 taskforce committee meeting on Wednesday, Superintendent Batsirai Mungwa who is responsible for police operations in Matabeleland South province said there was need to set up proper security systems at quarantine centres. He said some returnees were taking advantage of security loopholes to escape from quarantine centres. “There is a huge challenge when it comes to quarantine centres in the province as some don’t have proper security systems such as locks on the doors and perimeter fences. For example, Pangani Training Centre in Filabusi doesn’t have a perimeter fence which means that those under quarantine can have contact with the community,” he said. Supt Mungwa said it was also difficult to provide enough personnel to guard such areas as police had other duties such as manning roadblocks. “The loopholes in the security system gives returnees an opportunity to escape. A day ago, two fled from Pangani Training Centre. There is need for the department responsible to look into upgrading the security systems as soon as possible,” said Supt Mungwa. Lieutenant Melissa Mandudye from the Zimbabwe National Army (ZNA) said some of the people they deal with would have tested positive for Covid-19 but police and soldiers do not have the PPE. She said only officers from the Ministry of Health and Child Care have the required PPE. Lt Mandudye said this makes it difficult for security agents to effectively conduct their duties. She said some returnees under quarantine who tested negative for Covid-19 are afraid as they are staying together with those that tested positive. Lt Mandudye said some were even using the same facilities. “Our officers who are stationed at quarantine centres have a challenge as they don’t have the necessary protective clothing. They are only operating with masks and sanitisers yet they have to monitor and supervise people that are Covid-19 positive which then puts them at risk. Only workers from the Ministry of Health and Child Care are being catered for when it comes to provision of PPE,” she said. Lt Mandudye said when returnees try to escape it becomes difficult for the security personnel to deal with them especailly when they are Covid-19 positive. “For example, if an officer comes across a Covid-19 patient attempting to escape and confronts him or her, the individual just threatens to cough on the officer and the officer immediately stops advancing. There is therefore urgent need to equip all those working at quarantine centres with the adequate PPE to enable them to effectively carry out their duties,” said Lt Mandudye. — @DubeMatutu