The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
RENOWNED artiste Daniel Maposa has called on artistes to equip themselves with relevant skills and knowledge in order for the country’s arts sector to grow. The artiste who has a career spanning close to three decades is a theatre producer, arts management trainer and director of regionally acclaimed, Savanna Trust, an arts for social change organisation. In an extensive presentation during an online engagement that was facilitated by Gwanda’s TIME project on Monday evening, Maposa unpacked various factors that are key for the success of the arts industry including equity, teamwork, exposure and commitment. “We need to up our skills and knowledge if our sector is to grow. We aren’t short of talent as a country, but we’re short of relevant skills and knowledge on how we can grow ourselves and the sector at large. “Exposure is also important. One needs to know what’s happening in their world of arts so that they do not lag behind. For example, we at Savanna Trust attend shows and festivals throughout the country to participate and learn from them. There shouldn’t be a time when we say we have learnt enough. Let’s continue to sharpen our skills and knowledge,” said Maposa. The artiste who started his career 28 years ago as a singer, poet and dancer before focusing on theatre academically, holds a Masters in Arts and Culture Management. “I did this course at South Africa’s Wits University because I had developed a passion in arts management and wanted to have a positive impact on the Zimbabwean arts sector through sharing of skills,” he said. Maposa said there is need for artistes to be innovative and think about how they can develop their work as they should not be stagnant. “I have serious challenges with our dance sector in that we continue giving people the same dances that rarely tell a story. We need to grow into producing dance productions not just dance steps,” he said. He added that artistes should not be discouraged and stick to their passion as they will definitely encounter challenges along the way. The ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, Maposa said should not be viewed as a deal breaker but an opportunity for artistes to reach out to those in their communities by raising awareness. -@mthabisi_mthire.