The Chronicle Melissa Mpofu, Showbiz Editor
Tired of being at home all week doing the same things and seeing the same people? We all are, and the urge to unwind and go out to be with friends, family and colleagues is becoming more and more difficult to resist. But guess what, now is the time when you need to resist any temptation to leave your home for non-essential purposes as the Covid-19 pandemic just got real as it is causing a lot of mayhem in the country with the number of those infected spiralling out of control. Just on Thursday alone, 273 new cases were recorded with the bulk of them (231) being from Bulawayo. At one time, the new infections that were being recorded were those of returning residents, but the tables have turned as the local transmissions are topping with the 231 new infections from Bulawayo recorded on Thursday all being local cases, something that is alarming as it points to a bigger problem. It is not surprising though that there is an increase in local cases as people have relaxed. There is a general feeling that people are safe around their friends, family and colleagues so people are dropping their guard and not practising the disease’s preventive measures when around these people. While Government has come up with measures like the lockdown, closure of leisure spots as well as the ban of public gatherings, all to ensure that people are protected from the deadly virus, some, if not most, are ignoring these measures. At the beginning, when people would go to restaurants and retail shops, they would religiously put on their masks, but now, they drop them moments after they pass the security checkpoint. Police who have been tasked to monitor people’s movement as part of measures to contain the disease, are also being ducked by people, but who are they fooling? Whether you present a fake clearance letter or come up with a botched story to get a clearance to move around non-essential purposes, at the end of the day, you are putting yourself and your loved ones at risk. Opportunists, taking advantage of the closure of leisure spots, have converted their homes to mini-shebeens and nightclubs in order to provide entertainment to the desperate party lovers and make a quick buck in the process. The house parties, most of which are well-organised and hard to resist, are taking place across Bulawayo and the greater part of the country. They seem very cool and fun, but, what people are failing to realise is that such outings have the capacity to fuel the spread of the virus because if one person at such a gathering is infected, they can infect those in attendance as the virus is primarily spread between people during close contact. Part of the recommended Covid-19 preventive measures include hand washing, covering one’s mouth when coughing, maintaining distance from other people, wearing a face mask in public settings, disinfecting surfaces, increasing ventilation and air filtration indoors but sadly, all of these are not being observed at these house parties as people seem to forget the existence of the pandemic the moment they enter the party venue. While people may be sanitised upon entry, where does one expect a home owner to get manpower, to ensure people are regularly washing their hands yet all they are after is making a quick buck? It gets worse when the drinks start flowing as revellers start getting even closer to each other and activating the “if I die, I die” attitude, increasing their chances of getting infected. While it has not been confirmed, there have been rumours that some who have tested positive for the virus have been going on partying sprees to party for the last time in the event they die. Now imagine if you patronise a party where there is such a person. You can be guaranteed that this person will be buying drinks for everyone and dishing out hugs. The sad thing about this virus is that it takes just one person to spread it to many others, especially the elderly who are at a greater risk. British daily newspaper, Daily Mail this week reported how a Florida father is fighting for his life after contracting the virus from his son, who tested positive after ignoring his parents’ advice to stay home and not gather with friends. “John Place, from Plantation, is currently in the intensive care unit at Westside Regional Medical Centre where he was put on a ventilator for more than two weeks. The 42-year-old and his family all tested positive for Covid-19 last month after his 21-year-old son went out with friends one night and unknowingly brought the respiratory virus back to their home,” reported the Daily Mail.
Place’s wife — Michelle Zymet went on to narrate how she had repeatedly pleaded with her stepson, to avoid going out with friends and to always wear a mask. “He always assured me, ‘Don’t worry, mum. I’m doing everything right, relax, chill’,” Zymet narrated to Daily Mail. She went on to say she begged him to think about his dad, who is at a higher risk of severe Covid-19 illness because he is overweight and diabetic. But despite her pleas, he went out against her wishes one night in June, when he gathered with friends and removed his mask while eating and drinking. And days later, he felt cold symptoms and a friend at the get-together told him she had tested positive for coronavirus. By then, it already had taken hold in the young man’s household. “You let your guard down just one time, it’s all it takes,” Zymet added. “You come home and you infect the entire house.” This is likely what is happening locally, explaining the sudden rise in local transmissions. Those who are leaving their homes for whatever purposes may be getting the virus from wherever they will have gone and infecting those who will have been left at home. Other than partying, other no go areas for now are salons and restaurants for sit-ins as the risk there is way too high. Of course no one wants to look unkempt, but for now, people may want to seriously consider learning how to maintain their own hair and makeup until a time comes when it is safe to go to public spaces. After all, when in public, you will be covered in a mask so why bother? For a fact, the Government is caught between a rock and a hard place, as they are trying to strike a balance between keeping the country’s economy running and preserving lives. So some of the decisions they have made, like allowing restaurants to serve food within their premises and have sit-in customers have been done to try and keep the economy running following an outcry from tourism players. While it is naturally nice to have your favourite meal at a restaurant, it is critical for people to think of the hazards of sitting in those particular restaurants at such a time. People must know that this phase will come to pass so for now, they must focus on protecting themselves and their loved ones at all costs. So this means staying at home 24/7 and only leaving when going to buy essentials or work if one is an essential service provider. Visiting relatives and friends is also out of bounds until further notice as well as you will be putting yourself and those you are visiting at risk. It is always difficult to chase away someone when they visit, but to be frank, most people do not want visitors now as they are fighting to stay alive and do not want a person to come to their house and mess up their efforts. So, play your part and protect yourself and those around you. This will come to pass, let’s just be patient.