The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba & Mashudu Netsianda, Chronicle Reporters
IT’S all systems go for fast food outlets, restaurants and hotels after Government further relaxed lockdown regulations to allow sit ins. Cabinet last week approved the partial reopening of the tourism and hospitality industry and restaurants are now allowed to serve sit-in meals to a maximum of 50 percent of their capacity. National Parks were also reopened for local hunting only. Prior to the latest development, restaurants were just selling take-aways. The restaurants have also been allowed to revert to their normal operating hours but must strictly adhere to Covid-19 health protocols hence they can only serve a maximum of half their capacity at any given time. New regulations say every counter, table or chair in the restaurant or hotel must be disinfected before and after the opening of the premises for business. Employees must have Covid-19 free certificates and should also have gloves and face masks on. In Bulawayo, selected restaurants visited by a Chronicle news crew yesterday had reopened for sit-in customers. The news crew however observed that some customers were not observing the principle of social distancing. While some clients were excited by the latest development, others expressed reservations, saying they feared contracting Covid-19. Mr Tonderai Kombora who was at a Nandos outlet situated along Jason Moyo Street between 8th and Leopold Takawira Avenue in the central business district said he was missing eating out. “I am very excited because I really missed eating out, especially in such an environment. In fact, it is quite convenient especially for people like me who have busy schedules because you just want to eat comfortably before going about your day to day business,” he said. Ms Leona Mutsadyanga said in light of Covid-19, she preferred take-aways. “I think it is safer to just buy your food and leave the restaurants. I don’t think these chairs and tables are disinfected each time a customer leaves, which therefore makes it easier for the next customer to contract Covid-19,” she said. Mr Innocent Dube who was having a meal at Chicken Inn situated at the corner of Jason Moyo and 8th Avenue said it was difficult to maintain social distancing given the manner in which fixed tables and chairs have been arranged. “The tables are fixed and very close to each other making it difficult for customers to maintain social distancing. This is a busy fast food outlet and you will actually see what I am talking about during midweek,” he said. In Gweru, restaurants and popular food outlets were yesterday working on sitting arrangements so that their clients can maintain social distancing. They said they are planning to open today or tomorrow after Government allowed restaurants to serve sit-ins. The restaurants are however not allowed to serve beer. Parks have also been opened for local tourists and visitors as well as foreign tourists already in the country who are not in quarantine or isolation. Hunting safari operators can provide services to professional hunters and other customers who are not foreign clients or foreign tourists except for those already in the country and not in quarantine or isolation. Employers’ Association for Tourism and Safari Operators (EATSO) president Mr Clement Mukwasi applauded the Government for its decision to reopen domestic tourism. He said the move is going to have a positive impact on the survival of companies, livelihoods of employees and the resurgence of the industry that was rebounding after world recessions that preceded the year 2017. “We hope that the reopening shall also be followed by the lifting of the intercity travel ban and opening of international borders,” said Mr Mukwasi. He implored the Government to give industry financial support saying some companies were almost sinking or on the verge of shutting down because they had zero income as a result of the lockdown restrictions. “They were not paying creditors, the major being the Government itself in the form of licences, concession fees and rentals,” said Mr Mukwasi. Hospitality Association of Zimbabwe (HAZ) vice president Mr Farai Chimba said the Government had made the right move that will see the revival of the tourism sector. Mr Chimba said operators should adhere to Covid-19 regulations to avoid endangering the lives of their clients and workers. “We however continue to advocate for more affordable testing options as the cost is still prohibitive for business. We also call for the lifting of the inter-city travel ban to boost domestic tourism,” he said. — @pchitumba1 @mashnets