The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
THEY might have gone for over a decade without clinching the league title, but the country’s oldest football club Highlanders still retain the giants’ tag due to its illustrious history and ability to attract followers around the country. Bosso, whose faithful also refer to them as Ithimu yezwe lonke (team of the nation), has since time immemorial been home to great talent that illuminated the local football scene and dazzled multitudes of fans. Yesteryear greats such as Madinda Ndlovu, Peter Ndlovu, Ernest Maphepha Sibanda, Tito Paketh, Douglas Mloyi, Netsai Moyo, the late Mercedes Sibanda, Willard Khumalo, Adam Ndlovu, Nhamo Shambira, Titus Majola, Tymon Mabaleka, Dumisani Ngulube and Makheyi Nyathi rocked the scene and were loved beyond Bulawayo, the home of Highlanders. One such fan, who was dazzled by such great talent and “lured” to Bosso is Martin Chikwana, the Zimbabwe Golf Association (ZGA) vice-chairman. Chikwana regards himself as a top Bosso supporter and a lone ranger, who travels for all Bosso games, home and away. The only time Chikwana misses Highlanders’ matches is when he is out of the country. Growing up in the dusty streets of Sakubva in Mutare, Chikwana says he fell in love with Bosso in the early 1980s when he saw some of their players he had faced at inter-provincial schools’ championships turning out for the Bulawayo giants. “I lived most of my life in Chipinge and Mutare. Even though I had never been to Bulawayo to watch Highlanders playing at a young age, my love for Highlanders started in the early 1980s when I got to know most of the guys through the Under-18 inter-provincial championships. I was part of the Manicaland squad in 1983 and played against guys like Mercedes Sibanda, Willard Khumalo, Garikayi Rwodzi and Godfrey Paradza,” said Chikwana. “When they broke into the first teams of their clubs, national Under-20 and the Warriors, I was happy to see a generation of players I knew making the grade. Seeing your peers, people whom you rubbed shoulders with, playing for a big club was awesome and I just loved it. I told myself then that this is the team I want to support and have never looked back ever since,” he said. He religiously followed Bosso, first through radio commentaries that brought him closer to the club whenever it was in action. “Back then, the team had the likes of Madinda, Tito Paketh, Rambo and British (Mloyi) and I’d stay glued to the radio listening to commentary when they played. I wouldn’t move an inch and the way commentators screamed or described action gave me some visuals of the game. “How I wish the club returns to the past glory days and fortify its giant status. Even as I travel for their games, whether they lose or win, it feels good to be part of Highlanders.” Having failed to make it in football, the ZGA boss, who also played basketball and represented Manicaland at national tournaments, went on to try football refereeing and graduated alongside Kenny Marange and Masimba Chihowa, now chairman of Manica Diamonds. “Actually, I qualified first in a class that included Kenny Marange and Masimba Chihowa. I went up to Class 2 and, as a result of work commitment, was only able to officiate local teams up to Division One,” Chikwana said. Because of the nature of his business, Chikwana, an executive at CK Holland Auctioneers, with interests in construction and farming, had to leave the game he loves most to build partnerships and establish relationships on the golf course. His first tee off was in 2004 at Hillside Golf Club in Mutare, and he has never looked back, rising to become vice-president of the ZGA. Chikwana was club champion for a record six years from 2007 to 2012. He was elected vice-president of Manicaland Golf Union and later president in 2014. “The golf bug was so huge. I progressed to become captain of my club. I then led my team, winning a national handicap trophy in 2008. In 2010, my friend and I were crowned champions of a national team event in Harare,” he said. Chikwana has been in the ZGA board since 2014 and as the vice-president, he is in charge of national teams. “I was elected ZGA vice-president in 2015 and retained the seat in 2018. I’m a national selector, in charge of selecting national teams to participate in golf tournaments throughout the world. Being a senior vice-president entails that I’m in charge of the day-to-day running of the Zimbabwe Golf Association, which has culminated in us opening an office in Harare at the Country Club. The office opened its doors at the beginning of this month. “I have lots of good memories since assuming the vice-presidency and take pride in being accorded the responsibility to lead my country at regional and international events, “I led Team Zimbabwe at the All-Africa event in Nambia in 2018, represented Zimbabwe at The Open event at Carnoustie (Angus, Scotland) in 2018 and last year I was head of delegation at the All-Africa competition in Mauritius,” Chikwana said. He said golf had faced multiple challenges due to the Covid-19 pandemic, but applauded clubs for devising ways of maintaining their facilities during the lockdown. The lockdown affected maintenance of some golf courses as club employees were asked to stay at home, leaving only a skeletal staff at work. He said by the time restrictions were lifted and they were allowed to operate, a lot of damage had been done to most golf courses. “The impact of Covid-19 has also been financial. Clubs didn’t have income and inflation made matters worse. Members that normally contribute to the maintenance of clubs are only allowed to pay in local currency, which hasn’t helped matters,” said Chikwana. Also strict guidelines, which include banning of caddies on the course, have also taken away the excitement in golf, as players are failing to complete the course. Chikwana said players are complaining about the banning of caddies, leaving them to carry their own bags while playing. “It’s tough (playing under present restrictions) and there are so many challenges. We are able to play, but with no competitions and the practice of social distancing means we can’t socialise after a game. Remember, socialising is one of the cornerstones of playing golf. “Caddies, who are critical to golf, are not allowed, which means many players cannot complete as many rounds because the golf bags are too heavy for them to carry and play at the same time. Golf clubs and restaurants are still closed and that also impacts us financially. “For clubs to function efficiently, they need players on the course. But at the moment only 90 players are allowed on the course from 9am to 4pm. This impacts on the clubs’ income, as previously before the lockdown, up to 170 players could be found at a club.” Chikwana, himself is among many golfers that have failed to complete just two rounds of golf since resumption of play due to the absence of caddies and time restrictions. Golf games are also used to striking business deals, partnerships and opportunities, but this platform has essentially been dealt a big blow by stringent Covid-19 enforced restrictions since social distancing guidelines. Players can’t interact after games at the clubhouse as before where such meetings take place. — @ZililoR