The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
HIS football career seemed to be destined for greater heights until a cruel knee injury ended all those dreams at a young age of 20 and being an ambitious fellow he never allowed that setback to deter him. He then chose to impart football knowledge to youngsters, but five years into his journey, he was taken away from earth. Eleven years ago at the beginning of July, former Highlanders lanky defender cum-midfielder Bekithemba Malala Nkiwane breathed his last at Mpilo Hospital after a very short illness. He was 27. It was a demise of a young life that left many people struggling to get answers as to what really might have happened. I was personally very close to Malala and we were involved in a number of escapades and I would also attend some of his training drills with the Highlanders’ juniors. Highlanders senior coach at that time Madinda Ndlovu was always full of admiration for Malala’s drills and would even tip him as a future senior team coach. This is why it was hard for the legendary Ndlovu to take it in when a bar lady at the clubhouse informed him that Malala was no more. Bosso had just finished training and as usual Ndlovu was just passing by the clubhouse, probably en route to Mpilo Hospital to visit his juniors’ coach. When Malala was admitted to hospital, he had earlier on called me and said we should meet at our usual spot, the Highlanders clubhouse and towards the agreed time I left the Umthunywa newsroom and headed for the clubhouse. On my way I got a call again from him informing me that he won’t be able to come as he was feeling a bit dizzy. I remember chiding him not to drink “unpurified” alcohol. Little did I know that that would be our last verbal exchange. Malala was eventually admitted to Mpilo Hospital and in a short period, he was in the intensive care unit. Being one of those close to him, I was allowed to see him, but I left in tears. As I got in he opened his eyes, saw me and shared a smile. He tried to speak to me, but no words came out of his mouth. Since the sense of hearing is the last to go in a human being, I knew he could hear me if I spoke even though he would not be able to respond verbally. After assuring him that all will be well and he will soon be out, he raised his eyelids in acknowledgment and moving his fingers at the same time as if to indicate that he wants to write something. I handed him my pen, but he didn’t have enough strength to even hold it. It dawned on me that probably, we might not be together again, but I kept the faith, never wanting to give up. I bade him farewell which later proved to be a final farewell indeed. The next day, Malala lost the battle. Like his nickname, he had gone to sleep. This week, Chronicle Sport contacted three of Nkiwane’s former teammates at Highlanders, Dazidelio Kapenya, Johannes Ngodzo and Mkhokheli Dube and asked them about the former JW Mthimkhulu Primary School, St Bernard’s and Mzilikazi High School pupil’s character. This is what they had to say: Kapenya
We never played together in defence, but he was still a youngster in the team, he was an understudy. He was a very good young man, who was always full of jokes and was friendly to almost everyone in the team. Never at any given day did anyone have issues with him. Ngodzo
He was an excellent player, very mature for his age, especially where he was playing and off the field he was someone who liked to enjoy life with friends and he also hated scuffles, he was a clean character. Dube
A laid back character, but funny as well, he idolised Biya (Thulani Ncube). I was in the US when I heard the news. It was heartbreaking getting such news that he was gone, especially at such a tender age. He was one of the guys we played with from the juniors to the senior team and these are guys you develop a deep bond and relationship with. His death was a big loss to the football fraternity. May his soul continue to rest in peace.