The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
CABINET yesterday approved that Ekusileni Medical Centre in Bulawayo be transformed into a specialist teaching research hospital under the National University of Science and Technology (Nust). Ekusileni Medical Centre was scheduled to open at the end of last month for Covid-19 patients after shutting down for nearly 20 years. A brainchild of the late Vice President Dr Joshua Mqabuko Nkomo, Ekusileni was built in 2001 as a specialist hospital after Father Zimbabwe developed cancer and failed to access health care services locally. The hospital operated briefly and was shut down after it was discovered that the acquired equipment, worth millions of dollars, was obsolete. The institution will be run by the National Social Security Authority (NSSA) with Nust providing technical expertise. Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa revealed this during a post Cabinet meeting which noted among other issues that some private sector companies have started manufacturing medical personal protective equipment that were previously only imported. “The Minister of Higher and Tertiary Education, Innovation, Science and Technology Development Professor Amon Murwira briefed Cabinet on the proposal to transform Ekusileni into a Specialist Teaching and Research Hospital in line with international best practices,” said Minister Mutsvangwa. “The state-of-the-art facility will provide an opportunity for students to undertake the necessary training and cutting-edge health research, while providing a service to the nation.” She said illegal cross border areas, informal sector, fuel queues and quarantine centres with returnees are some of the country’s Covid-19 hotspots where extensive information dissemination was needed. Minister Mutsvangwa said Cabinet approved the partial reopening of the tourism and hospitality industry which will result in restaurants serving sit-in meals at 50 percent capacity. She said National Parks will be opened for local hunting only. Minister Mutsvangwa said the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe was working flat out to conclude investigations into the illicit financial dealings that has resulted in suspension of some mobile agents with bulk accounts. She, however, assured the public that while those accounts have been suspended the public will continue to transact using their mobile money. — @nqotshili