The Chronicle The spike in Covid-19 cases calls for concerted efforts from each and every Zimbabwean in order to contain the pandemic that is threatening to wipe out mankind. There is therefore no time for political theatrics because lives lost cannot be replaced. The country had by last Friday recorded 2 296 confirmed Covid-19 cases and 32 deaths. Government has already responded by tightening lockdown regulations which include imposing a dusk to dawn curfew. Police on Saturday announced new and industry specific requirements for the public to be allowed to pass through police checkpoints and roadblocks. When he announced the tightening of Covid-19 regulations last week, President Mnangagwa said given the prevailing situation, there was a need to suspend some of the liberties citizens have been accustomed to in order to effectively fight the pandemic. It is therefore mind-boggling that we have individuals and organisations pushing for mass demonstrations at such a period when the focus should be on minimising exposure to the pandemic. We therefore wonder whose interests these individuals and organisations are serving given that the world over, nations are doing all within their powers to avoid gatherings as part of measures to curb the spread of the virus. At home, Government is making economic sacrifices by reducing businesses’ operating hours and drastically reducing the number of workers even at Government offices. Companies and institutions are adapting to the “new normal” by working with skeleton staff while the rest of workers either operate from home or are on leave as part of measures to decongest the workplace. The challenge at hand is to tame this monster that is threatening to devour the nation and anybody who acts to the contrary is the people’s enemy and must be exposed. The Government can come up with very strict regulations but these can be rendered useless if they are not supported by members of the public. People should appreciate the importance of containing this pandemic and as repeatedly said, developing countries like Zimbabwe should avoid being overwhelmed by Covid-19 cases. Our capacity to handle increased severe Covid-19 cases is limited hence the need for us to marshal all our energies at preventing its spread so that the numbers remain manageable. Our daily pre-occupation should be implementation of prevention measures at home, in the community, at the workplace, church, funeral, at the bank and any other gathering. When the Covid-19 outbreak was first reported, we used to dismiss it as “their problem” but now it is our problem and we have to confront it in order to minimise its devastating effects. Let’s be wary of those who relish to see us perishing while they hide in the comfort of their posh houses purporting to be fighting for our rights.