The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
MIDFIELDER Innocent Kutsanzira’s salary dispute case against former club Bulawayo City FC failed to take off at the Labour Court yesterday as there was no officer to hear the case. Kutsanzira dragged his former paymasters to court, accusing them of non-payment of salary. The central midfielder sustained a career-ending injury in August last year in a Zifa Southern Region Division One League match between City and CIWU and the midfielder accused the Premiership returnees of neglecting him by leaving him to pay his own medical expenses despite getting injured while on club duty. Kutsanzira broke his leg on August 16, 2019, and an orthopedic surgeon diagnosed it as a displaced fracture of the right tibia and fibula. City who then took him to a private Bulawayo hospital where he was operated on, argued that they met all contractual obligations until Kutsanzira’s contract expired in March. Kutsanzira has since engaged labour consultant Mavurere Makore. “My client is arguing that he wasn’t paid. This is what we are fighting for so that he is paid his dues,” said Makore. City, represented by vice-chairman Zenzo Moyo, said they settled all his dues. According to City’s defence papers, they cleared the player’s outstanding 2017 bonuses amounting to $660 on March 2. They also deposited bonuses and sign on fees totalling $1 950 on March 2. Kutsanzira was paid his January and February salaries on March 25, with his outstanding March salary cleared on June 11 when City got assistance from business associates. “As a club we value the welfare of players and we’ve gone out of our way to keep them happy. It’s unfortunate that Kutsanzira has taken this path (going to the Labour Court) because everything with regards to his injury and contractual obligations were paid up. Supporting documents are there to prove it,” said Moyo. Genstorm Enterprises and a local apostolic sect, Johane Masowe weChishanu Selbourne Park, helped City offset Kutsanzira’s dues. — @ZililoR