The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
ZIMBABWE’S customs clearing agents have adopted a document that seeks to professionalise the sector and improve the way of doing businesses to facilitate regional and international trade. Prior to the latest development, the freight forwarding sector had been tainted by a number of rowdy elements that included bogus agents that duped clients or facilitated intrusive leakages along the borders. The shipping and forwarding agents association of Zimbabwe (SFAAZ) chief executive officer, Mr Joseph Musariri, said the document was a result of input from various players in the sector. He said the customs clearing agents’ code of conduct and ethics was signed and adopted in Harare last Thursday. “Some of the main objectives of the document include the desire to establish professionalism that will protect the image, credibility and sustainability of the Customs Clearing Industry in Zimbabwe,” said Mr Musariri. He said the new order will help level the playing field in terms of the behaviour of stakeholders and also enhance the sector’s contribution to the development of trade and commerce. “Further, our idea is to cultivate solidarity and unity among customs clearing associations and companies. “This code will be binding for all players in the customs clearing industry so that we may be able to self-regulate.” Mr Musariri said they decided to restore and maintain the highest ethical standards so as to instil professionalism in the freight forwarding sector. “We also agreed that all clearing agents shall comply with all laws, rules and regulations and not commit acts that may obstruct or destruct the objective and any functions of any Government agents,’ he said. Mr Musariri said under the new way of doing business, their members must commit to carrying out community social responsibility programmes in their respective areas of operation. This, he said, will enhance empowerment and development projects in the communities. Mr Musariri said where a member breaks the code, they risk being censured, suspended or expelled from the association. — @tupeyo