The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
FORMER Zimbabwe international Zenzo Moyo yesterday made a passionate plea to parents and guardians to allow talented footballers to follow their dream and make most out of football. Moyo, the 2000 Soccer Star of the Year, urged Pumula parents and guardians to allow their children to participate in football. He stressed that football had become one of the best paying jobs, hence talented footballers stand a chance of securing a bright future in the game if given full support from home. Speaking at the relaunch of Falakhe FC in Pumula North yesterday, Moyo said: “My message to adults is that if talented kids want to play football, allow them to do so. Don’t influence them to pursue your failed dreams if they are interested in sport. “Don’t close windows for the youngsters. I went to Cyprus and Greece through football and I rubbed shoulders with great personalities because of soccer. Football is now one of the biggest employers.” Funeral parlour, Falakhe, revived its football club in Pumula North which will compete in the Zifa Bulawayo Metropolitan Province Division Three League. The return of Falakhe FC has charmed the local community, with the club’s catchment area set to stretch from Pumula North to Robert Sinyoka, Methodist Village and St Peter’s. Alderman Ephraim Ncube said they’re excited to have Falakhe back. Ward 17 councillor Sikhululekike Moyo lauded Falakhe for setting up a club for juniors to keep them busy and nurture talent. “We hope one day these youngsters will excel beyond the league that they will play in. Our wish is that one day, Bulawayo City FC will send its scouts to look for talent at Falakhe FC when games resume after the Covid-19 pandemic,” said Moyo. Ward 27 councillor Siboniso Khumalo, who is also Bulawayo City FC board chairman, urged residents to support the team. “It’s good to see that Falakhe is giving back to the community through soccer. Football isn’t a past time sport, but nowadays it gives employment. The challenge I’m giving to youngsters is that grab this opportunity and strive to reach greatness and earn a livelihood through soccer,” Khumalo said. Former Warriors, Zimbabwe Saints and Dynamos striker Agent Sawu remains the greatest football export from Pumula. Besides Sawu, some renowned footballers to emerge from Pumula include former Highlanders’ midfielders Siza Khoza and Honour Gombami, the late Railstars and Njube Sundowns defender Johnston Shambarume. Chicken Inn defender and Bosso junior product Guide Goddard as well as Bulawayo City FC captain Zibusiso Sibanda also hail from Pumula. — @ZililoR