The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
THE Judicial Service Commission (JSC) is with effect from Monday scaling down members of staff reporting for duty at the courts across the country in response to the surge in Covid-19 cases. JSC skeleton staff will start a two-weeks-in-two weeks out schedule until the Covid-19 situation improves. All courts and offices shall, however, remain fully operational and will be manned by managers. Only litigants and witnesses will be allowed to enter the courts during this period. Employees with known underlying medical conditions will be excused from coming to work to protect them from the virus. On Wednesday, there was a Covid-19 scare at the High Court in Harare when reports circulated that a relative of a sitting judge had tested positive to the virus. The judge in question stays with the relative. In the past, JSC would announce such operational changes in response to major changes announced by President Mnangagwa in the Covid-19 induced lockdown restrictions. In an interview yesterday, JSC spokesperson Ms Rumbidzai Takawira confirmed that with effect from Monday July 20, all stations will be manned by skeleton staff. According to the Ministry of Health and Child Care, the country on Thursday recorded 273 new Covid-19 positive cases bringing the total number of cases in the country to 1 362. The national Covid-19 death toll now stands at 23, following three deaths recorded in Bulawayo. Due to these escalations in Covid-19 positive cases, Ms Takawira said it has become necessary to put in place immediate preventative measures to safeguard the health of JSC staff and members of the public. “In this regard, the following measures take effect from Monday 20 July, 2020. All stations will be manned by skeletal staff which should rotate every fortnight. Members with underlying conditions will be excused from coming to work. The determination of qualifying underlying conditions shall be made solely by the Head of Department,” she said. Ms Takawira said members of staff who use public transport should be given priority when exempting members from coming to work. All managers, magistrates and members who have been issued with JSC vehicles shall constitute skeletal staff. “All courts and offices shall remain fully operational. Members of staff who have been excused from work should be reminded that they must remain available and ready to report for duty as and when it becomes necessary for them to do so,” she said. Ms Takawira said the new measures had nothing to do with a Covid-19 scare at Harare High Court after a relative who stays with a judge tested positive to the virus. She said JSC is just taking precautionary measures in the wake of the surge in Covid-19 positive cases.