The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Victoria Falls
THE Zimbabwe Handball Federation (ZHF) will hold elections on July 25 for a new Matabeleland North board to replace the incumbent structure that was set up in 2017 to revive the sport in the province. The elections will be conducted at the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC) offices in Bulawayo. The current board chaired by Taurai Muberekwa was put together by ZHF in December 2017 following suspension of the previous board on corruption allegations. It was tasked with fulfilling specific targets like crafting a constitution, which was drafted and adopted in May 2018. Muberekwa, a handball coach based in Binga, said his board recorded significant successes. “The board introduced financial discipline by opening a bank account, which the previous board had failed to do, and established district structures across the province. “The board facilitated formation of junior and senior clubs in and out of schools, while also conducting coaching and refereeing courses, mobilised equipment such as balls as well as facilitated transportation of six girls that were selected for national duty and secured passports for them, and also secured tournaments sponsorship from Agribank and Moonlight for the province,” said Muberekwa. The current board includes vice-chairman Chariot Dlamini (out of schools) from Hwange, Qakathekile Ndlovu (secretary-general), Sikhululiwe Mutami (deputy secretary-general) and Sibusisiwe Dube (treasurer). The others are Sisasenkosi Moyo (athletes commission), Mduduzi Madala (coaches commission), who is deputised by Everness Mbewe of Nkayi, while Brian Mazwi of Umguza is the referees commission chair and Blessing Manyabi of Binga chairs women in handball. Ruth Ngwenya of Lupane, Melody Nehuma of Tsholotsho and Ashley Muchengetwa of Bubi are committee members. Their election in 2017 put an end to a seven-year one-man-reign by Churchill Mabasa. However, Muberekwa said the board has been facing challenges as some individuals had been deliberately throwing spanners in the path of the committee and influencing members not to affiliate in protest over removal of the Mabasa-led board. “We would use our personal monies to travel to ZHF meetings in Gweru and Harare and paid duty for balls. We have other members that formed parallel structures as a way of trying to destabilise the sport and we want to warn members to be watchful and follow the constitution,” said Muberekwa. He bemoaned lack of corporate support for the sport and appealed to the business world to partner ZHF to develop handball. Their goal is to ensure a third of the province takes up handball, as they also strive to introduce beach handball and facilitate construction of structures in the province. — @ncubeleon