The Chronicle The new Premier League campaign will commence on September 12 after a virtual meeting between clubs confirmed the calendar yesterday. But following the agreement between all 20 shareholder clubs, the new fixture list is set to be unveiled just weeks before the action restarts. Sportsmail had previously reported that those involved in the top flight were focused on agreeing a prompt start to the new campaign. Despite the confusion over how the dates will unfold over the next few months, it was confirmed the final match round of the campaign will take place on May 23. Many within football had initially called for the next season to be pushed back to ensure the current term can be completed amid the uncertainty stemming from the coronavirus pandemic. But there was no appetite from the Premier League over a lengthy pause, and officials remained aware of the need to ensure the new fixtures line-up with leagues across the rest of Europe. It has been suggested top flight teams agreed the fixture list should be published by August 21, roughly three weeks from the now confirmed start date. But the full extent of the congested schedule will not be laid bare until at least after the Championship play-off final. The Premier League has also confirmed it will continue to thrash out the scheduling for the domestic competitions with the FA and EFL. Clubs were widely expected to give the green light for September 12, which has remained their favoured start date. The new EFL campaign will also commence on the same day — with the bottom three tiers to be rounded off on May 8 and 9. The play-off final fixtures will then revert back to the Spring Bank Holiday weekend at the end of the same month. It is also believed the Community Shield will be held at Wembley on August 30. The first international break to take place since November will then see players jet off around the world — just a matter of weeks before the top flight recommences. Meanwhile, FA Cup replays will be scrapped next season to ease fixture congestion and reduce the physical toll on Premier League players, according to reports. Top flight managers have already registered their concerns about the number of games players will be required to play in a compressed season. According to the Mirror, The FA has now responded by abandoning replays but there could be more trouble on the horizon surrounding the Carabao Cup. It’s understood that Premier League managers want to be given permission to field Under-23 teams in the competition to rest players in between league fixtures. If they’re not allowed, then some teams could threaten to pull out of the competition as they look to prioritise the league and European tournaments. Last season, Liverpool fielded a side made up largely of youth team players as they sent their first team to the Club World Cup in Qatar and other teams could use that as justification to field weaker sides. However, such a move is likely to prompt opposition from EFL clubs, who are reliant on additional income from broadcasters and sponsors for Carabao Cup games against top flight sides. Their main fear will be the potential knock on effect of sponsors pulling their money out of the competition and broadcasters removing games from their schedules, thus reducing the money Football League clubs will receive. Talks between the EFL and FA are set to continue next week, while a vote is expected to take place regarding the implementation of the five substitute rule once the Championship play-offs have concluded. The Premier League is also likely to face questions from some of English football’s biggest clubs, who will be in Champions League and Europa League action until the final week of August — just one week prior to the start of the 20/21 season. — dailyonline.