The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
VENDORS in Gwanda, Matabeleland South province have called for the speedy completion of construction of the new vending markets after they were removed from undesignated areas as part of efforts to fight the spread of Covid-19. Vendors in the town were operating from shacks at undesignated points in the CBD along the Bulawayo-Beitbridge Road where there was no water and sanitation facilities. The vendors were ordered to dismantle their stalls in April to make way for the disinfection exercise in the town. The municipality identified two market places in the CBD and work on developing the markets has already started. The council has also identified market places in the western suburbs where some of the vendors will be operating from. The chairperson of the Gwanda Vendors Association, Mr Michael Ndlovu said about 700 vendors have been affected by the relocation. He said council should speed up work on the new sites so that the stranded vendors can move in and start fending for their families. “We initially stopped operating because of the lockdown and when we resumed after the regulations were relaxed, we were asked to dismantle our shacks because council had found us new places to operate from,” said Mr Ndlovu. He said each time they contact council, they are told that the development of the markets is still in progress. “There is need for speedy completion of work on these markets so that we can start work. In the meantime we are asking the municipality to allow us to return to our old sites and we make an undertaking to adhere to the Covid-19 regulations such as social distancing,” said Mr Ndlovu. In an interview the mayor, Clr Jastone Mazhale said they were still in the process of developing new vending sites. He said they had so far managed to open Jahunda Bus Terminus Market where a few vendors were now operating from. “We have identified vending sites for the vendors who were operating from undesignated points and work on developing the sites has started,” said Cllr Mazhale. He said once complete, those vendors who will be moved to the new sites will be required to strictly abide by the municipal regulations to minimise spread of the pandemic. – DubeMatutu