The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
Former Kwekwe City Councillor, Alderman Reason Nyamadzawo has died. Nyamadzawo is former councillor for Ward 5 where he served for two terms on a Zanu-PF ticket. A veteran educationist who was a teacher for more than two decades before venturing into politics, Cde Nyamadzawo died on Tuesday after complications caused by diabetes at a private clinic. He was 76. Cde Nyamadzawo was also paternal grandfather to six-year old Axellia Nyamadzawo who was allegedly murdered by her mother in South Africa recently. His son Tino said the family was still in shock. “I was called this morning (Tuesday) and told that his sugar levels were giving problems. I rushed him to a private clinic where he was pronounced dead upon admission,” said Tino. He said the family was still to come to terms with Cde Nyamadzawo’s death. “We are still in shock as a family as we never expected anything of that nature to happen. He was strong all along and going about business but then all of a sudden this happens,” said Tino. Mourners are gathered at his Mbizo 4 residence. Burial arrangements will be announced in due course. At the time of his death, Cde Nyamadzawo was Zanu-PF vice chairperson for Rusununguko District in Kwekwe. Zanu PF Midlands provincial spokesperson Cde Cornelius Mpereri said the province had applied that he be accorded provincial hero status. “As Kwekwe district, we are lobbying with the national and relevant authorities that he be accorded provincial hero status. This is so because he is a national liberator who went on to work hard for the party even after independence. As you are aware, he was a councillor and served the party diligently,” he said. Cde Mpereri described Cde Nyamadzawo as a hard-working party member who always stood for the truth. “He was hard-hitting and never was economic with the truth. He served the party as well as his constituency and Kwekwe and the nation at large with due diligence. His work was for everyone to see,” he said, adding the party would be poorer without him. Cde Nyamadzawo was instrumental in the establishment of Tasungana Primary School, whose construction he influenced during his tenure as councillor. Cde Nyamadzawo was also school development committee chairperson of the school at the time of his death.