The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Court Reporter
FOUR police officers from the Criminal Investigations Department (CID) Homicide Section in Bulawayo went on self-isolation after they recently arrested a Luveve murder suspect who tested positive for Covid-19 after escaping from a quarantine centre in Beitbridge. The four detectives arrested Mandla Moyo (36), aka MaFifty, of Entumbane suburb for killing his former neighbour in Luveve on July 11. Moyo is alleged to have killed his landlord in South Africa, crossed into Zimbabwe and later escaped from a quarantine centre in Beitbridge before heading to Bulawayo where he killed Nkosilathi Ndlovu (31) of Luveve suburb. Moyo recently appeared before Western Commonage magistrate Ms Gladmore Mushove facing a murder charge in connection with the death of Ndlovu. He was remanded in custody to Thursday. National police spokespersons Assistant Commissioner Paul Nyathi yesterday confirmed that the four detectives who arrested Moyo went on self-isolation. He, however, said the quartet tested negative for Covid-19. “The detectives went through the necessary requirements as outlined by the Ministry of Health and Child Care and World Health Organisation health guidelines. They got tested for Covid-19 and the results came out negative,” said Asst Comm Nyathi. Moyo’s relative recently told Chronicle that he escaped from a quarantine centre in Beitbridge after fleeing from South Africa where he allegedly killed his landlord and attempted to murder his girlfriend and her relative. Moyo, who lived in Luveve suburb before going to South Africa, allegedly fatally stabbed his former neighbour Ndlovu on July 11 at around 7.30PM after the deceased caught him stealing a cellphone. Ndlovu bled to death at his doorstep after Moyo attacked him and fled. Moyo is a fugitive in neighbouring South Africa after he allegedly killed his landlord. He also allegedly severely assaulted his girlfriend and her relative in the neighbouring country, leaving them for dead. He allegedly told some Bulawayo residents that he was in Zimbabwe to kill his girlfriend’s child. On Friday, 284 returnees escaped from different quarantine centres and 30 were arrested. The latest development comes at a time when local transmissions, especially in Bulawayo and Harare are rising. Last week, magistrates’ courts at Western Commonage Court in Bulawayo suspended all trials after 12 public prosecutors, among them seven police officers attached to the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA), were placed on self-isolation for 14 days after one of them tested positive for Covid-19. All criminal cases were immediately transferred to the magistrates’ court at Tredgold Building. Public institutions have been hit hard by the global pandemic which left scores of people in Bulawayo infected and many quarantined. -@mashnets