The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
ZIMBABWE National Water Authority (Zinwa) has started rolling out a programme to install 35 000 bulk pre-paid smart water meters targeting all local authorities, farmers and other consumers. The water authority which is owed more than $150 million by consumers, says the new system will enable it to enforce payment for water as well as force defaulters to clear arrears. The cost of a prepaid meter is between US$300 and US$500 per unit. The target is to complete the installation of meters within the next six months and the billing under the new system will be based on actual consumption as opposed to estimates. The implementation of the pre-paid water metering system has already started after successful trials in Mvurwi and Chivhu towns. In an interview, Zinwa chief executive officer Engineer Taurai Maurikira said the pre-paid smart water metering system was sustainable in terms of generating revenue for procurement of water treatment chemicals and maintenance of the water supply infrastructure. The Bulawayo City Council (BCC) last year halted installation of pre-paid water meters saying the project was too expensive. BCC has for years been pushing for the implementation of pre-paid meters saying it would improve revenue collection as most rate payers were not paying for water. Residents associations had in the past strongly opposed the prepaid water system which they argued would deny some residents the right to access water. They argued that if the council implemented the proposed system, it would make water inaccessible to the poor. Eng Maurikira said there is a huge gap between what Zinwa is generating as revenue and collecting. “We have initiated a programme to install 35 000 bulk pre-paid water meters countywide. We have done pilot projects in Mvurwi and Chivhu towns and they have been hugely successful and this programme is expected to be completed within the next six months. We are self-funding in most of our operations and we rely on revenue coming from water sales,” he said. Eng Maurikira said Zinwa has been on a downward side in terms of revenue as its clients, especially local authorities, have been struggling to settle debts. “The revenue and collection are not matching and there is a huge gap between what we are generating as revenue and collecting. For us to put our clients in control of their bills and be able to pay for water, we have initiated a programme of installing pre-paid water meters countywide,” he said. Eng Maurikira said water consumers should only consume water they are able to pay for. “We want our clients to be in control of their bills so that there are no huge bills beyond their capacity to pay. “This is one of our major projects which Zinwa has embarked on countrywide and our mandate is to supply water to the generality of the population, to all communities at affordable tariffs.” Eng Maurikira said Zinwa completed the rehabilitation of 20 boreholes at Nyamandlovu Aquifer, which is now pumping an extra 10 megalitres of water per day to Bulawayo. “We are now working on the pipes and leakages so that we increase that 10 megalitres to about 12 megalitres per day,” said Eng Maurikira. Government has attributed Bulawayo’s diarrhoea outbreak in Luveve and surrounding suburbs that has killed 13 people to water shedding and vandalism of pipes and released an additional $7,4 million for the drilling of 10 additional boreholes in the city. The outbreak is attributed to the 144-hour water shedding regime and vandalism of outflow sewers and dilapidated pipes, some of which have outlived their lifespan. In April, Government released $10,6 million to Zinwa towards the rehabilitation of 15 boreholes at the Nyamandlovu Aquifer to increase Bulawayo’s water supply. Eng Maurikira said Zinwa has also decentralised its services to 20 service centres in line with Government’s programme of devolution. “We are at the service centres where our staff are offering services to communities ranging from billing, maintenance and repair of burst pipes as well as attending to queries. We don’t want people to travel to major cities and towns to seek services,” he said. — @mashnets.