The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
HOTELS and restaurant operators are beginning to make plans to reopen as the tourism sector begins to awaken following relaxation of lockdown rules by Government last week. This comes as MARS has launched free testing of tourism workers in Victoria Falls after securing 600 test kits. The tourism sector is among the economic sectors worst affected by Covid-19, which led to international travel bans and subsequently a total shutdown of the industry, with eateries, hotels and activities being closed for a minimum of three months. Government last week issued a statutory instrument (SI) allowing partial reopening of the tourism industry. Under the new rules restaurants can serve customers for sit-in meals during licensed hours. The Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority (Zimparks) was also allowed to open national parks and other amenities including the mighty Victoria Falls, as well as safari operators to open for local clients. The partial reopening of the industry for local clients is expected to restore hope in the industry, especially at a time when small operators were almost not sure of coming back to business life. A snap survey by Business Chronicle around Victoria Falls showed that some restaurant and hotel operators had set dates for reopening and are currently working on putting health modalities for safety of clients and employees. Many premises have reportedly been disinfected while operators are busy with testing of staff. Wild Horizons chief executive Mr Gary Archer said the tour operator, which also runs restaurants and lodges is working on some modalities before opening its properties. He said the new look upmarket Lookout Café, which reopened in January after massive refurbishment, will resume operations once health and safety measures have been fully prepared. Three Monkeys restaurant, another upmarket eatery is expected to open today. Leading operator, Africa Albida Tourism (AAT) is also understood to be preparing to reopen its Victoria Falls facilities comprising Victoria Falls Safari Lodge, Club, Suites, Lokuthula Lodges and The Boma Dinner & Drum Show this Thursday after closing more than three months ago. Business Chronicle was told that the facility plans to start with a limited number of rooms and clients so as to maintain social distancing. Several other players in the industry are reportedly busy facilitating testing of their workers in preparation for reopening. This comes as the tourism industry has been calling for re-opening saying their counterparts across Zambezi River in Livingstone are already back in business. Hospitality Association of Zimbabwe (HAZ) Victoria Falls chapter chair Mr Anald Musonza encouraged players in the sector to enforce safety regulations for a safe destination. “MARS got about 600 kits as part of their corporate social responsibility to the Victoria Falls community and are offering free testing. Covid-19 tests are being done and we encourage every worker coming back to work to get tested and have face masks, gloves, sanitisers and disinfectants. “I urge everyone to appreciate this gesture and utilise it for a good safe destination for our tourists and our community,” said Mr Musonza. — -@ncubeleon