The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
THE rise of virtual shows has given a platform to artistes who were in the past sidelined by the so-called gatekeepers of the local arts industry. Social media is a powerful tool and can be used positively for one’s promotion and visibility. Zimbabweans have as a result of the Covid-19 lockdown been using social media a lot to interact with each other. Musicians who are hosting a series of shows on Facebook especially have kept the people entertained. It is such shows which have given artistes, especially those who are usually sidelined, a platform to shine and showcase their talents as most of them are being organised by new promoters. Most of the new promoters who are now at the forefront of promoting talent, used to sponsor musicians. Nash TV which is hosting lockdown shows every Friday, has in the past been sponsoring musicians. Through this show, the likes of Chase Skuza, who normally would not have gotten a gig to perform alongside Jah Prayzah in Harare, or even in Bulawayo, was once featured on one of the shows. He travelled all the way to Harare for this show and impressed, leaving people asking why such talent is rarely given slots to perform. Tambaoga who was long forgotten was also featured. Fusion Media Group’s FMG virtual shows held on Mondays are also giving unknown talents from Bulawayo a chance to shine. Passion Java’s Gara Mumba Iwe live shows on Wednesdays have also helped promote mostly unknown Zimdancehall artistes and also revived careers of artistes who had been forgotten. These include artistes such as Tocky Vibes. After following these Facebook shows, playwright and arts critic, Raisedon Baya recently said these platforms will lead to the discovery of talents. “Social media will lead to the discovery of many talents that otherwise would have gone undiscovered because mainstream media was always discriminatory.” Although Baya here singled out mainstream media, what should be known is that in the arts industry, there are people who are gatekeepers, those who want everything arts related to pass through them and get their approval before getting to the masses. Noble as this may seem to some, it is saddening to note that most gatekeepers have used this privilege to suppress the vast artistic talent that Zimbabwe has. This likely explains why many artistes, over the years, have been crying out to be heard, to be seen, just on a platform like television or radio, but their cries have fallen on deaf ears. For years, they have been longing for such, but now with social media, those barriers to the mainstream media are no longer there. Cleopas Sikhosana, the Nkayi-based maskandi musician whose video went viral on social media some months ago, is a good example of singers exposed by social media . Sikhosana’s songs are now receiving airplay on radio as a result of social media. He now has a Facebook page which already has a following of more than 2 000 people. Another social media exploit is Zimdancehall artiste Van Choga. Through his appearances on the Facebook shows, the chanter, dressed like a vagabond, has made some Zimbabweans fall in love with him with videos of his high-level chants and performances circulating on social media. People are now following his career and looking forward to his new music. Media personality Patience Phiri however said it is sad to note that some artistes are not utilising social media especially during this time when most people are forever glued to their devices because of the lockdown. “Some artistes are underutilising social media. What artistes missed over the years is learning and utilising the power of social media to grow their brands. We need to appeal not just to Zimbabweans but Africa and the world at large because we live in a global village,” said Phiri.