The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
THE world has changed dramatically due to the Covid-19 pandemic and these changes have been clearly evident in the world’s digital behaviours as billions of people who are under lockdown are turning to the Internet to help them cope with life and work. More than ever, people are consuming music, drama and movies online. People have also been spending a lot of time watching television with more than a third of Internet users across the 17 countries in GlobalWebIndex’s special coronavirus study saying that they have been spending more time using smart TVs and dedicated streaming devices such as Apple TV and Amazon’s Fire Stick. This is also the case in most homes in Zimbabwe as seen with the number of Internet users that has increased by 413 000, an increase of 9,4 percent between 2019 and 2020. According to a report by Data Reportal issued in February this year, there were 4,81 million Internet users in Zimbabwe in January 2020 and 980 000 social media users, numbers that have likely doubled if not trebled during the lockdown. Many people say that they expect their new habits to continue even post Covid-19. One in five Internet users say they expect to continue watching more content on streaming services with one in seven (15 percent) saying they expect to continue spending more time using social media. It is however, important to note that some of these “new habits” are purely the result of a sudden increase in spare time and there’s a good chance that activity levels will quickly return to pre-lockdown levels once people are able to return to work and are once again able to socialise with friends and family in the physical world. In a report by DataReportal on their Digital 2020 April Global Statshot Report which gives a detailed analysis of how people around the world are using the Internet, social media, mobile devices, and e-commerce, it has emerged that there have been big jumps in digital activity, especially in countries that have the strictest Covid-19 lockdowns. The significant increase is encompassed on the amount of time people take on social media use, watching movies online, listening to music online and some unexpected opportunities for digital advertisers. “The latest data shows that the number of Internet users and social media users around the world have both increased by more than 300 million over the past 12 months, despite delays in reporting in some key countries due to Covid-19. “DataReportal analysis indicates that 4,57 billion people now use the Internet, an increase of more than seven percent since this time last year. Social media users are growing even faster, up by more than eight percent since April 2019 to reach 3,81 billion as of April 2020,” reads the report. Global social media use has not quite reached the 50 percent penetration mark yet, but the latest trends suggest that we should pass this key milestone before the end of 2020. “The number of people using mobile phones has also increased, with global user numbers up by 128 million over the past 12 months. GSMA Intelligence reported 5,16 billion unique mobile users at the start of April 2020, meaning that roughly two-thirds of the world’s total population uses a mobile phone today,” further reads the report. Locally, film productions are being consumed more during this period. Productions that include Cook Off which is now showing on Netflix, Wadiwa Wepa Moyo, Bazukuru, Deep Secrets, Ziyathunqa and Uhangelwa among others have found the light at the end of the tunnel. The last time locals watched their own content in numbers was during the Amakhosi Theatre days and when the likes of Amakorokoza and Studio 263 were a hit. For the music sector, artistes like Jah Prayzah have benefited immensely through the digital consumption of his music on platforms such as YouTube where his channel now has close to 400 000 subscribers. Artistes like Mzoe 7, Novuyo Seagirl, Hwabaraty and Bhadilah are also benefiting as their singles which they have released during the lockdown have gotten more support. New artistes like Stewie Le Savage and South Africa-based Intercessor have also been unearthed. Online shows that include FMG, Byo Live sessions, Credisi, Nash Tv Friday Night Live and Gara Mumba Iwe have also been a hit among locals with some of these shows attracting close to 30 000 viewers. Through these shows, artistes like Van Choga, Nate and Samuzik have been exposed. This positive change in digital behaviour must be quickly embraced by artistes and music promoters alike because going forward, more entertainment content will likely be consumed more online than physically. The challenge is to just find ways to monetise the online platforms. — @mthabisi_mthire.