The Chronicle Harare Bureau
The National Blood Service Zimbabwe (NBSZ) has lifted the suspension of the free blood policy to Government institutions following the release of $43,5 million by Treasury on Thursday. Both NBSZ and Ministry of Health and Child Care confirmed payment of the subsidy, which will enable economically disadvantaged patients requiring blood and seeking treatment from Government institutions to get the blood for free. Speaking to journalists on Thursday, Deputy Minister of Health and Child Care Dr John Mangwiro said the suspension had been necessitated by late payments of the subsidy to the sole blood transfusion company by Government. He said Treasury quickly responded by paying the amount due, resulting in the NBSZ shelving its decision to demand cash upfront from Government patients. “The move to suspend the blood coupons facility had been necessitated by late payments to the NBSZ,” said Dr Mangwiro. “I want to tell you that we paid them yesterday Wednesday $43 million, which was transferred to their account. “I am sure that suspension will be lifted because we have paid them what we owed them.” NBSZ spokesperson Ms Esther Massundah confirmed that the payment had been made and the suspension had since been lifted. Ms Massundah said NBSZ will continue engaging Government on settling of about $126 million that remains, to cover the whole debt, which covers the period February to May 2020. “Yes, we can confirm that the suspension was lifted yesterday (Thursday) while a payment plan is being worked out by the Ministry to clear their debt,” said Ms Massundah. The debt accrued from blood and blood products extended to vulnerable patients who received treatment from public health institutions and required blood. Institutions would request blood for these patients from NBSZ using coupons, which will then be redeemed from Treasury. Government committed to subsidise cost of blood for its patients in June 2018 following concerns on high cost of blood, which was making it difficult for poor patients to get quality health care. Following continued increase in costs and high inflation coupled with late payment by Government, NBSZ resolved earlier in the week to suspend the coupon system and demanded cash upfront from institutions, a situation that was likely to see institutions transferring the burden to patients. The cost of blood has been pegged at $12 000 a pint or US$120.