The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
ARTISTES in Bulawayo have been urged to speedily apply for the $10 million Covid-19 Relief Fund for the Arts sector that is being facilitated by Government, before the deadline of July 31 as disbursements are on a first come, first serve basis. The lockdown to curb the spread of Covid-19 has resulted in the arts sector being the hardest hit as its activities have been stopped. This has caused untold suffering for artistes who now have no source of income as live shows and public gatherings remain banned. Last week, Government, through the Ministry of Sport, Arts and Recreation, unveiled the Covid-19 Relief Fund for the arts sector, which artistes can apply for in their respective provinces. Application forms can be found at the Ministry’s Provincial and District Offices as well as the National Arts Council of Zimbabwe (NACZ) and National Gallery of Zimbabwe (NGZ) offices. The forms may also be downloaded from the ministry’s website and the NACZ and NGZ websites. NACZ Bulawayo province director, Charity Nyathi said so far, there were only five artistes who had applied for the fund in the province. “We urge artistes from the Bulawayo to apply in their numbers. So far, there are only five who’ve applied and the deadline is July 31. It’s a first come, first serve basis. “Even if some may say it might be little (fund), but it can help pay here and there,” advised Nyathi. For the Covid-19 relief fund for youths that was offered last month, Nyathi said there was an overwhelming response from artistes. “Although I can’t give actual figures, we had an overwhelming response from the artistes.” She also encouraged artistes to register with NACZ so that they can access facilities from Government. “We have been encouraging artistes to register their arts organisations, groups or as an individual with the NACZ so that when such funds from Government come to the fore, it becomes easy for them to access. When artistes want to go and do their works outside (the country) and need clearance from us, we can’t do that for someone who we don’t know. “Even when shows come up, we can contact the artistes and recommend them to whoever needs their services,” said Nyathi. The NACZ registration, Nyathi said, was a very easy process, with a once-off payment of $260. “To be registered with the NACZ, there is a fee that one pays of $200 to register and $60 for the form. Thereafter, one fills in the form with their details and discipline, that’s it. This is a once-off payment.”