The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
THE Beitbridge Rural District Council (BBRDC) has embarked on rehabilitation works on major roads after receiving $280  000 from the Zimbabwe National Road Administration (Zinara). The local authority’s chief executive officer, Mr Peter Moyo, said yesterday that the programme was being rolled out in two phases. He said they were already working on roads in Beitbridge East under the first phase and would move to Beitbridge West under the second phase. According to Mr Moyo, most roads are in bad shape and more resources are needed to make them accessible. “Civil works are underway in most areas where we are rehabilitating roads to improve on service delivery and to enhance the monitoring of development projects including those being implemented by central Government,” said Mr Moyo. He said the council had received $280 000 from Zinara under its the second quarter allocation for this year. “This is being spent on re-gravelling and upgrading roads to make them accessible. Some of the roads were damaged by heavy rains. “In some areas, the bad state of the road is affecting the operation of public transport and private cars are taking advantage to charge exorbitant fares”. Mr Moyo said in Beitbridge East they were attending to the Dumba-Dite (30km) road, Lukange-Tshaswingo (17km), Chabili-Number 52 (15km), Tshituripasi- Malabe (20km), Madaulo-Chief Matibe (6km), Tshaswingo-Mandate (12km), Number 52-Makombe (18km), Lesanth-Makombe (18km) and Bubi-George Swansco (40km) roads. On the western part of the district, he said they will cover the Zhovhe-Mazunga (25km), Nottingham-Bishopestone Estate (40km) and Nottingham-River Ranch (20km) roads. Mr Moyo said their target was to complete servicing the roads before the onset of the rainy season. The development comes a few days after Beitbridge East legislator, Albert Nguluvhe, called on the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure Development to expedite the completion of unfinished road projects in the district. He said the upgrading of most roads, especially the Lutumba- Tshikwalakwala route was long overdue. The road cuts across six wards, four irrigation projects, several business centres and links Beitbridge and Chiredzi districts as well as Zimbabwe, Mozambique and South Africa’s components of the Great Limpopo Trans frontier Conservation Area. — @tupeyo.