The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
AFTER a playing career that failed to blossom, former AmaZulu player Nkosizile “Warrior” Mhlanga (34) feels coaching has given him a second chance to achieve what he failed as a player. Having left school in 2003, Mhlanga joined the now-defunct AmaZulu where he rose through the ranks, but failed to make a name for himself in the senior side. His tale is no different from that of many who showed great potential as youngsters, but failed to rise to stardom. It was in 2005 when Mhlanga made a decision that he has regretted to date. He was 19 when a contractual dispute with AmaZulu prompted him to head for South Africa where he did odd jobs in construction before returning home. The move to the neighbouring country all but put an end to his career. “Whenever I meet people who watched me play or those l played with, their question is always what happened to your career? They ask in shock because my career just ended unexpectedly. When you look at me now and the people I played with, you will not believe it. When I was at AmaZulu there were the likes of Simon Munawa, Vusa Nyoni and Costa Nhamoinesu,” said Mhlanga. “Some people who used to watch me play do not even believe that I failed to make something out of my football career. When I look back at how my career ended, I realise I could have done things better. I think it all fell apart when I failed to agree contract terms with AmaZulu. That is when the frustration began. As a football player you know your first contract in football is where you should make most of your money.” Mhlanga said his father, who was not into football much, was the one managing him and advised him against agreeing to the AmaZulu deal. His father was of the view that it wasn’t a good deal and at the same time his brothers that were in South Africa were also urging him to try other things that side. So in November of 2005, Mhlanga left the country for South Africa and that basically marked the end of his playing career. Fifteen years later, Mhlanga feels coaching has given him a second chance in football. “I returned to Zimbabwe in 2010 and worked at some company, but later left. I then met Desire Mugwada whom I played with in the Amazulu juniors. He is the one who came up with the idea of starting a junior team project. We came up with this project. In our first season we came fourth in Serie A. “Now I think we have become a household name in the football circles; everyone knows of the team New Generation. I played for Bulawayo province in 2002 then we were coached by Ali Baba. He would be proud to see the job I have done with this team. I think this is the beginning of big things for me in terms of my coaching career. I’m hoping to go for courses and further my knowledge of the game,” he said. New Generation is from Emakhandeni and hopes to change the lives of many youngsters in the community. Last season they struggled to finish the league because of financial constraints and Mhlanga is confident their project can grow into something big if they can get financial support. He added that his experience in football and life was key in helping youngsters make use of their careers. “Young players must not give up on football. They should be strong and never give up. Our boys should stay focused and aim to build their careers,” said Mhlanga. Away from football, Mhlanga also has a passion for music. He released a house track titled Ngenani in 2017 produced by DJ Mjoks and features Band with No Name lead vocalist, Ishmael Muvingi, who goes by the moniker Litshe. “I didn’t consider taking up music as a career although I loved it a lot. I was more of a consumer, but of late I felt the urge to pick up the mic. I have written several songs across genres such as house and hip-hop,” Mhlanga said. — @innocentskizoe