The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
IT’S looking bright for Wankie and Zimbabwe football legend Amos Rendo, who had his first blood transfusion at Hwange Colliery Hospital on Saturday following an overwhelming response to the family’s appeal for help. Rendo, a rock solid defender for Chipangano and the Rhodesian national team during his playing days, was diagnosed with critically low haemoglobin levels that measured at 3.3 grams per decilitre instead of between 13 and 16 grams per decilitre. About US$300 was required to buy blood for his transfusion and the family, with the assistance of former Hwange goalkeeper and coach Weekly Mwale, embarked on a public appeal for urgent assistance. There was a massive response from a cross section of concerned individuals, who included politicians like Zanu-PF central committee member Fati Mpofu, coaches Paul Moyo, Bongani Mafu, Agent Sawu, David Phiri, Godfrey Paradza, Mthenjwa Moyo, Mandla Mpofu, Mebelo Njekwa and Luke Masomere. Former and current players, Vitalis Kamocha, Gilbert Zulu, Clemence Matawu, Abraham Mbaiwa, Mkhokheli Dube, Oswald ‘Cargo’ Sibanda, Richard Choruma, Leon Mwale, Mayfield Daka, Shimani Mathe, Jabulani Ngwenya, Douglas ‘British Mloyi, Chabuka Mwale, Fortune Ncube, Siza Dube, Stanley Nkomo, Chenjerai Dube and Juma Chitonje, among others, heeded the family’s SOS by chipping in to assist the ailing legend. Zifa Southern Region executive committee member Fiso Siziba, former regional boss Musa Mandaza, Bulawayo Province executive committee member Otrick Siziba, Chicken Inn secretary and renowned City lawyer Tawengwa Hara, Bulawayo Chiefs chairman James Rugwevera and Zifa panel referee Bwanali Bonamali, former Chronicle Sports Editor Lovemore Dube and some diasporans donated to this worthy cause. community stood up and came together to assist one of their own. More than $11 000 and US$300 was raised in cash in addition to donations in kind. The family expressed gratitude to those that came through for them in their hour of need. “The old man is in high spirits and as family we are extremely grateful to everyone that has come to our aid. It’s through such benevolence that you really get humbled and may such gestures be extended to every other person who sends an SOS. Once again a big thank you to everyone that parted with their hard earned cash; no donation is too small or too big. Zikomo kwambili,” said Rendo’s son Thembinkosi, himself a former Hwange player, whose promising career was brought to an abrupt end by an injury.