The Chronicle Business Reporter
PRETORIA Portland Cement (PPC) Zimbabwe has handed over 90 tonnes of cement to Cyclone Idai Victims Housing Project in Manicaland. In 2018, thousands of people in the eastern part of the country were left homeless while others were killed after Cyclone Idai struck. In support of the humanitarian cause following the Cyclone Idai disaster, PPC this month (July 15), donated 90 tonnes of cement to President Mnangagwa and last week, the cement producer handed over the donation to Mutare City Council. In a statement following the donation, PPC Zimbabwe said for over 100 years, it has invested in the country beyond infrastructure, helping to build up and develop the citizenry. “For over 100 years PPC has invested in Zimbabwe beyond infrastructure, helping to build up and develop people. “The organisation has stepped in to support Zimbabwe in overcoming the devastation caused by Cyclone Idai in 2018. “PPC has donated 1 800 bags of SURECEM cement to the Cyclone Idai Victims Housing Project- translating to 90 tonnes of cement to be utilised by Mutare Municipality for the cause,” it said. PPC said it was a proud supplier of building materials and solutions in Zimbabwe and across Africa and has been instrumental to the growth of communities across Southern Africa. It said as a responsible corporate citizen with a vision to support the longevity of Zimbabwe’s infrastructure as well as the sustainability of  development in the country, the cement producer  believes it has an important role to play. “With Zimbabwe pushing towards Vision 2030 and the infrastructure goals in that vision, PPC is holding the torch to light the way. “As Zimbabweans strive to build our nation, we, as PPC believe together we are stronger. “Through the donation of world-class SURECEM cement, PPC is lending its expertise, innovation and engineering to ensure that together, we build a future that benefits all communities.” The company’s sales and marketing manager Mr Nkosana Mapuma was quoted saying all efforts are greatly needed to make a difference, and change the lives of those affected by Cyclone Idai. “As a nation that practices the spirit of Ubuntu, Zimbabweans will always come together to help neighbours in need,” he said. As market leaders in the cement industry, Mr Mapuma, said PPC was committed to the rebuilding and development of the nation, regardless of the geographic corner. “With this in mind, PPC Zimbabwe presented three truckloads of UNICEM cement to Mutare province for delivery to affected areas. “SURECEM, formerly UNICEM, is world-class 32.5N general purpose cement that has been engineered for excellence when used in multiple applications. “It is just one of the high quality, dependable products out of several forming the PPC SURERANGE,” he said. Mr Mapuma said PPC donated SURECEM product range as it is the ideal product to ensure impeccable levels of quality across the wide range of construction projects in place to rebuild after Cyclone Idai. “No matter the hardships that face Zimbabwe, PPC will always rise to the challenge as it looks to the future, using its pillars to dismantle tough problems in revolutionary ways,” he said. The leading cement producer believes it has an important responsibility in Zimbabwe beyond ensuring safe, sustainable, and secure infrastructural development.