The Chronicle Business Editor
WITH growing focus on domestic tourism as an immediate business impact point in the wake of the disruptive Covid-19 pandemic, players in the tourism sector are agreed on the need for increased collaboration and creation of price sensitive packages to entice the domestic traveller. Given the high risk of infections from the pandemic across the globe, countries are keeping tight lockdown measures, which puts prospects of international travel under check. The sector’s cash cow has over the years been the lucrative international traveller, and now that this is problematic due to lockdown, the industry needs to look from within on the interim in order to sustain operations and save jobs. After insense lobbying Government has agreed to partially open domestic tourism facilities and industry players have been busy of late, trying to strategise and implement measures to rejuvenate business. The Hospitality Association of Zimbabwe (HAZ) recently held a virtual Tourism Stakeholders Interface  as part of their efforts to support and intensify resuscitation of the country’s domestic tourism. Critical issues including price modelling and the need for aggressive marketing took centre stage. A cross section of  stakeholders from the tourism industry value chain together with the Zimbabwe Tourism Authority (ZTA) joined the webinar to strategize on ways to revive the country’s domestic tourism in line with goverment’s post Covid-19 Tourism Growth and Recovery Strategy. ZTA Domestic Tourism and Strategic Research Director,   Sophie Zirebwa, said the efforts being made by the tourism sector to develop and increase the prospects of domestic tourism in the country were in order. She said the tourism body was excited by the industry eagerness towards developing domestic tourism, particularly the much needed business improvement in the leisure side of domestic tourism. “There were quite candid discussions in the meeting with operators. They interogated their business models and critical issues emerged on the pricing of  tourism products and services,” she said. “The lack of domestic tourism packages and the general lack of information about what is available, that is, the tourism attractions, activities  that can be accessed by  locals.” Zirebwa said that ZTA was happy to observe that within the discussions, the tourism industry players were proposing solutions and giving timelines to solve  challenges raised. “One of the proposals that came up was for players to cooperate and collaborate in terms of creating packages, which are price sensitive for the,” she added. “Another issue that also came through and important was the need for operators to come together and roll out an awareness campaign as they promote domestic tourism.” HAZ president Mr Clive  Chinwada said the meeting resolved that there was an immediate need to come up with a bundle of tourism value chain activities including transport, accommodation and activities in various destinations replicating what used to be the Flame Lily tours. “These packages must suit every pocket and encourage tourism industry value chain players to work together for survival as well as to ensure the competitiveness of destination Zimbabwe,” he said. Tourism Business Council of Zimbabwe president, Ms Winnie Muchanyuka, encouraged the sector to improve on collaboration. “We have been fragmented, we need to collaborate more. We need to continue working together as stakeholders in the sector. To be honest, ZTA has done it’s best to lead with messaging but we as players have been lagging behind on complimenting their efforts,” she said. The tourism stakeholders interface webinar comes on the heels of a recent ZTA organized service excellence training engagement, which is also a part of the preparations towards reviving the country’s domestic tourism. Preparations to launch the Tourism Growth and Recovery Strategy are currently underway.