The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
Journalists have been implored to continue adhering to media ethics and principles in reporting Covid-19 pandemic issues. Speaking during a Covid-19 reporting capacity building workshop in Kwekwe on Tuesday, Zimbabwe National Editors’ Forum National Coordinator Njabulo Ncube called upon journalists to adhere to the basic fundamentals of journalism when covering the global pandemic. “Of late since the outbreak of the corona virus, some journalists have been throwing journalism ethics through the window. We should continue respecting human lives like we used to do before the corona virus. Nothing has changed, we should be guided by the sanctity of life,” said Ncube. He urged journalists to embrace corona virus as the ‘new normal’ and try to work from home whenever possible. “We have to embrace the pandemic as the new normal. It is the new way of life and we have to ensure that we always stay safe. Adhere to stipulated guidelines like social distancing and wearing of face masks. Above all, whenever possible, avoid travelling at all costs,” he said. Ncube said most media house had already embraced the pandemic which is likely not to end anytime soon as witnessed by the emergency of online publications. “Most traditional media houses have gone online and as journalists we should also follow suite. Be innovative and find ways of working from home and avoid physically attending gatherings,” he said. Speaking at the same function, Media lecturer, Mr Jasper Maphosa urged journalists to check on facts before publishing stories. “With the emergency of social media platforms and online publications, most journalists have also abandoned basic ethics like verifying facts. I therefore urge journalists to check on their facts with relevant authorities before publishing or peddling fake news. this is the time that we need to be vigilant and report objectively as we play our role in the fight against the global pandemic,” said Mr Maphosa. Journalists who attended the one-day workshop were drawn from across the Midlands Province.