The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
PRESIDENT Mnangagwa has appointed Zimbabwe Media Commission (ZMC) and Zimbabwe Human Rights Commission (ZHRC) commissioners who will start serving with immediate effect. Chief Secretary to President and Cabinet’s Office Dr Misheck Sibanda confirmed the latest appointments that were made in line with Section 242(1) of the country’s Constitution. Professor Ruby Magosvongwe, an expert in communications, who is also the University of Zimbabwe director of information and public relations and has previously served in various boards including the Zimbabwe International Book Fair board, chairs the ZMC. Other commissioners are Ms Dumisani Mashingaidze, a lawyer by profession, who is the administration manager at the Zimbabwe Consolidated Diamond Company Private Limited; Mrs Susan Makore, AB Communications the group chief executive officer who has vast media experience and has worked as a media lecturer at the Zimbabwe Open University and served as a board member for the Broadcasting Authority of Zimbabwe (BAZ), as well as Ms Miriam Majome, a lawyer and an associate member of the Law Society of Zimbabwe and Zimbabwe Women Lawyers Association. Others appointed to the ZMC are Mr Jasper Maphosa, Retired Major Edward Mbewe, Mr Tanaka Muganyi, Dr Phillip Pasirayi, Mr Jasper Maphosa and Mr Alec Ncube. Mr Maphosa, is a Great Zimbabwe University lecturer while Rtd Maj Mbewe has held media and public relations positions at institutions such Parliament of Zimbabwe, BAZ and the Zimbabwe National Army as well as various non-governmental organisations. Mr Muganyi, is a legal practitioner with interest in human rights, criminal, labour and constitutional matters. Dr Pasirayi has 15-years’ experience in media and governance issues and is the executive director at the Centre for Community Development in Zimbabwe while Mr Ncube, is an acting director at the National University of Science and Technology (Nust) Innovation Hub. The President also appointed Dr Angeline Guvamombe, Mrs Dorothy Moyo, Mrs Beauty Kajese, Dr Cowen Dziva and Mr Brian Penduka to serve on the ZHRC. The five replace Dr Ellen Sithole, Dr Joseph Kurebwa, Mr Japhet Ndabeni-Ncube and Ms Kwanele Jirira whose terms of office expired in May while Comm Carrol Khombe resigned in 2018. Dr Guvamombe, a human resource, business administrator and strategic planner joins the commission having previously served until retiring as a Commissioner in the Zimbabwe Republic Police. Mrs Moyo, is one of the lead facilitators at Alternative to Violence Project Zimbabwe, where she is involved in community peace building and her experience is set to benefit the commission. She worked in the private sector at managerial level and has rich experience in human resources. Mrs Kajese, a communication manager in the Zimbabwe Land Commission has been appointed to ZHRC bringing on board community relations, co-ordination and counselling skills. Dr Dziva is lecturer at the Great Zimbabwe University and served as one of the pioneer secretariat members in the ZHRC. Having worked at the United Nations offices in Geneva, he brings to the commission extensive exposure in Minority Rights Advocacy and African Human Rights Mechanism. Mr Penduka, a lawyer, has vast experience in the field of human rights and democracy and has practiced in both public and private sector. He has represented victims of organised human rights abuse at apex courts including the High Court, Supreme Court and the African Commission for Human Rights. — @nqotshili