The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Court Reporter
THREE men operating as a syndicate have been jailed for stealing 90 cellphones and a laptop worth $250 000 from a motor vehicle that was parked in Bulawayo’s city centre. The trio is part of a gang of criminals who have been terrorising motorists by breaking into their cars and stealing valuables. Raymond Chimonero (25) of Cowdray Park suburb, Kwanele Ndlovu (29) of Makokoba suburb and Valliant Nyoni (27) of Mzilikazi suburb stole from Mr Vumani Ncube, who is a cellphone dealer residing in a flat in the city centre. Ndlovu and Nyoni are repeat offenders who have a previous conviction for a similar offence. The brands of the stolen phones include Samsung, Huawei, Nokia, and Apple among others as well as an HP laptop. Chimonero, Ndlovu and Nyoni were convicted of theft from a motor vehicle charges by Bulawayo magistrate Mr Shepherd Mjanja. Chimonero was sentenced to 40 months in jail of which six months were suspended for three years on condition that he does not within that period commit a similar offence. A further 12 months were suspended on condition that he restitutes the complainant $70 334 leaving him with an effective 22 months to serve. Ndlovu and Nyoni who are repeat offenders were each slapped with 54 months in jail of which 12 months were suspended on condition that they restitute the complainant $70 334. An additional three months imprisonment under CRB Number 2685A-B/19 was brought into effect and they will each effectively serve 45 months in jail. The trio was given up to September 9 to restitute the money. Mr Mjanja said the offence was premeditated warranting a custodial sentence. “Theft from a motor vehicle is a serious offence and what aggravates this offence is that Ndlovu and Nyoni committed this offence while on community service for a dishonesty related crime. In the circumstances, this case calls for a jail term,” he said. Prosecuting, Mr Leonard Chile said on October 19 last year at around 7PM, Mr Ncube parked and locked his Mazda Axella at the corner of Fife Street and 15th Avenue. Chimonero and his accomplices then connived to steal from his car while he was away. “The accused persons acting in common purpose took advantage of the complainant’s absence and smashed the right rear passenger window of the complainant’s car to get access to the property that was in the car,” said the prosecutor. The trio also stole a maroon bag before leaving unnoticed. When Mr Ncube returned to his car, he noticed that some of his belongings were missing and reported the matter to the police. Investigations led Chimonero arrest and he implicated Ndlovu and Nyoni leading to the recovery of 21 other cellphones and the accused persons’ arrest. Ndlovu and Nyoni were in September last year convicted of stealing more than US$2 300 and other valuables from two motor vehicles in the city centre. They were each ordered to perform 315 hours of community service at Barbourfields Police Station. Of late, parking in Bulawayo’s city centre has turned into a nightmare for motorists who risk having their cars broken into or being robbed at gunpoint. Robbery syndicates are targeting unattended cars parked in front of shops and business premises. — @mashnets