The Chronicle Elita Chikwati, Harare Bureau
The first batch of 500 motorcycles to ensure agricultural extension officers can easily reach the farmers they advise, monitor and help were handed over yesterday by President Mnangagwa to the Lands, Agriculture, Water and Rural Resettlement Ministry. The President has mobilised 5 000 motorcycles as part of Government’s efforts to capacitate and upgrade agricultural extension workers to enable them to carry out their work more effectively. Shortage of transport has been limiting the number of farmers the officers can visit per given period. The motorcycles from local companies FSG and Valley Seeds were handed over to the Land Ministry at State House. Vice President Kembo Mohadi, several ministers, heads of departments in the Agirculture ministry, members of the private sector and extension officers attended the function. While donating piglets under the Presidential Livestock Inputs Scheme Support programme in May, President Mnangagwa pledged to support the Ministry of Lands with 5 000 motorcycles in recognition of the need for a responsive, well-capacitated extension delivery system. Motorbikes will be distributed to extension officers while some will be allocated to agricultural colleges to enhance student training. Receiving the motocycles, Lands, Agriculture, Water and Rural Resettlement Minister Perrance Shiri, said the handing over of the bikes was testimony that the leadership was in support of the transformation of the agriculture sector. “Today’s event is an example of the commitment by Government of Zimbabwe and partners to make Zimbabwe a food secure nation and this will enable the country to regain its bread basket status for the Southern Africa region. “With such kind of support from the highest office, the agriculture sector is poised for success and we are sure footed as we leap towards sustainable national food and nutrition security. Having a responsive agricultural extension service enables appropriate training and technical support. “A sound, technically aware mobile and robust extension services is a critical touch point in the agriculture transformation jigsaw. “Technical backstopping and coaching of farmers is pivotal in boosting agricultural productivity, ensure climate change adaptation, ensuring food security, improving rural livelihoods and promoting agriculture as an engine of pro-poor and inclusive economic growth,” he said. Minister Shiri said the implementation of land reform in 2000 had resulted in an increase in the number of farmers who desperately needed support of extension staff. The department of Agritex has 4 790 agricultural extension workers and 505 agricultural extension supervisors, and the veterinary extension staff establishment is 1 563. However, of those, 1 312 are occupying posts. Agritex has 620 functional motorbikes and 900 motorbikes that are non-runners while the Veterinary Services has 315 motorcycles, of which 254 are functional and 61 are non-runners. Minister Shiri said the departments were severely handicapped in their quest to reach out to farmers because of the lack of mobility to enable front line extension staff to carry out their duties, a development that has compromised visibility of extension personnel. FSG managing director, Mr Steve Morland, said they were willing to work with Government in boosting agricultural productivity. “I hope the motorcycles will go a long way in capacitating extensions officer,” he said. Valley Seeds managing director, Mr Temba Nkatazo, said they were grateful that Government had allowed them to partner with the ministry. “We hope this will translate to improved yields. We have realised that extension workers are willing to work and assist farmers but their major challenge is mobility,” he said.