The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
TWO people including a popular Shurugwi gold miner who made headlines in March after he allegedly hired thugs who tied a 24-year-old man to a tree and severely tortured him for stealing 70 grammes of gold worth US$3 400 at a mine at Bred Farm died in a road traffic accident along Gweru- Mvuma road. Willard Mugadza popularly known as Dread Welly and Foster Machaya, police said, died after a Toyota Hilux double cab they were travelling in veered off the road and rolled several times just after the Gweru – Mvuma toll gate. Mugadza was one of the two passengers traveling in a vehicle that was being driven by Machaya. The second passenger suffered injuries and was admitted to a hospital in Gweru. Midlands provincial police spokesperson Inspector Joel Goko said the accident occurred at the 43km peg along Gweru- Mvuma road around 11PM on Tuesday. “I can confirm the death of two people including the driver who died on the 43 km peg along Gweru- Mvuma road. “Machaya allegedly lost control of the vehicle which veered off the road and overturned before landing on its roof. Mugadza and Machaya died on the spot. The second passenger escaped with some injuries and was admitted to a hospital in Gweru,” said Inspector Goko. He urged drivers to take extra caution on the roads to avoid unnecessary loss of lives. Mugadza made headline when he allegedly hired people to assault 24-year-old Fabian Mabhugu who later died on March 1 while admitted to Gweru Provincial Hospital from injuries sustained following his alleged 24-hour torture at the hands of the hired thugs. Mabhugu was exhumed at the instigation of his family who requested a second post-mortem as they felt that the first was tampered with. Mugadza died while the matter was still pending. Mabhugu was a part-time driver for Mugadza and was allegedly abducted together with his friend Lenny Hwehwe (25) after their boss claimed they had declared gold with a shortfall of 70 grammes worth US$3 400 at a mine in Shurugwi.