The Chronicle Chronicle Reporter
ZAPU will not participate in the planned July 31 illegal protests as doing so will increase the risk of members of the public contracting Covid-19. Already, the country has recorded over 2 000 Covid-19 positive cases and 28 deaths. Earlier this week, President Mnangagwa announced new measures to prevent the spread of the virus that include a dusk to dawn curfew. Some opposition activists and NGOs with help of Western countries are however, planning anti-Government demonstrations under the guise of anti-corruption protests. The organisers of the demonstrations have been pushing their agenda through social media platforms such as Twitter. Recently, one of the organisers of the demonstration, Transform Zimbabwe leader Mr Jacob Ngarivhume exposed their plan that it was about power grabbing not fighting corruption when he posted on social media that the protests should usher in National Transitional Authority to take over Government. In a statement yesterday, Zapu spokesperson Mr Iphithule Maphosa said the focus should be on fighting Covid-19 not politicking. He said the agenda of July 31 protest organisers is still shrouded in mystery. Mr Maphosa said the protests seem to advance individual agendas while sacrificing the public. “We would like to categorically state that the mother party is not an active participant to the said demonstrations that are purportedly against corruption. “This is informed by the reluctance by the organisers of the said demonstrations to engage, consult, or better still to invite other opposition players into partnering them,” said Mr Maphosa. “The mother party is also, as a responsible entity that is sensitive to the safety and well-being of the populace, concerned more about the high-risk citizens are being subjected to by calling them to converge and mass protest. “The lives of a desperate population are being pawned and deliberately put in firing line from the marauding coronavirus.” He said while there is an urgent need to address corruption, Zapu is seriously concerned with the timing of the said anti-corruption protests. Government has taken several steps towards fighting corruption as witnessed in the arrest of several high-profile figures including the recent arrest of fired Health and Child Care Minister Dr Obadiah Moyo.
Mr Maphosa said the country’s problems need a holistic approach. “As such, we are certain that instant popularity, gained from a moment of desperation and freedom deprivation, does not carry the magnanimity of the Zimbabwean struggle in its totality. “Are we just interested in the moment’s popularity or we want a lasting and sustainable solution to the people’s predicament? This is a question everyone must ask themselves. Don’t we care about the current ravaging pandemic, so long we will be popular for a moment? Is that what the Zimbabwean problem calls for?” asked Maphosa. He said the focus should be on fighting Covid-19 as opposed to politicking.