The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Basketball Union of Zimbabwe (Buz) has started engaging potential partners as part of its preparations to host the fourth edition of the Southern Africa 3X3 Under-18 basketball tournament to be held in Bulawayo in December. Ten countries—hosts Zimbabwe, Zambia, Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Malawi, Namibia, South Africa and Indian Ocean islanders Madagascar and Seychelles—have confirmed their participation in writing. Zimbabwe won the Under-18 competition dubbed “Three Lions 3X3 Southern Cup” held in Botswana last year. The competition, set for Bulawayo, will run from December 3-6. Buz president Joe Mujuru said the International Basketball Federation (Fiba) excluded regional powerhouses Angola and Mozambique from participating in the competition. “Early confirmation gives us as the host nation adequate time to plan so that we host a successful event. We’ve started engaging key stakeholders so that they can assist in planning for a successful event. Remember, Bulawayo has in the last six years hosted major tournaments like the AUSC Region 5 Under-20 Championships in 2014, the Afro-Basket and African Games qualifiers in 2015 and in 2018 we had the Zone Six Basketball Club Championships. “As Buz we rotate international competitions and in January we had the Afro-Basket 2021 preliminaries played in Harare. So, our hope is that the key stakeholders, who include government through relevant ministries, corporate world, local authority and basketball lovers will make the 3X3 regional competition, which is gaining momentum, success,” said Mujuru. He is confident that hosting the tournament will leave a lasting legacy in Bulawayo, especially coming after the lockdown. When Bulawayo played host to the 2014 AUSC Region 5 Under-20 Games, the floor and electronic timers that were imported from the United States of America remained in the city and continue to be used for regional competitions as well as domestic events. Fiba is on a drive to market 3X3 basketball, which has been incorporated into the Olympics, and by hosting the December competition, part of the legacy equipment to benefit Bulawayo include floor and electronic timers that will be used in the tournament. In the build-up to the competition, Mujuru said they will stage selection competitions once the Covid-19 lockdown ends. “We hope once the lockdown ends schools will open and they’ll start their games. Our coaches will scout for talent at schools’ competitions, giving every child in the Under-18 category an equal chance to be selected. Knowing that there is a regional competition coming in December also inspires young players to work harder and enhance their chances of being selected for national teams,” said Mujuru. — @ZililoR.