The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
United Kingdom-based Afro-pop singer Valee Music is working on her debut EP through which she wants to make a mark on the local and diaspora music scenes. Recently, she released Watora Moyo, a single off the forthcoming EP. It seems to have been received well as it is already featuring on the Star FM top 20 chart show while its video has amassed over 100 000 views on YouTube. Born Valerie Menyiwe Sibanda in Bulawayo, Valee Music, a former Greenfield Primary and Petra High School pupil said her forthcoming EP titled Yin Yang will be out sometime this year. For Watora Moyo, an Afro-pop single that was produced by Charlie Kay, Valee Music said she partnered with Inkredible Musiik who co-wrote and produced the track. “Watora Moyo is about finding love, holding on to it and cherishing the good times,” Valee Music said. She said it was encouraging that her EP’s lead single was blazing the charts after it made top 10 recently. “I’m happy to know that the lead single of my upcoming EP has been well received back home. I have more in store as my EP is coming out soon along with more singles,” said Valee Music. Singing in three different languages to cater for her diverse markets, Valee Music said she blends modern Pop with Afrobeats. “I sing in three different languages, English, Ndebele and Shona so as to cater for a wide audience which includes the Afrobeats community and the mainstream UK market,” she said. From the young age of six, Valee Music who relocated to the United Kingdom at the age of 14 said she wanted to be an entertainer, having been inspired by her uncle who was a music producer and the likes of Whitney Houston, Busi Mhlongo and Boom Shaka. “My hopes and dreams were to be a successful artiste. From the age of six, I knew I wanted to be an entertainer and my influences at the time were Whitney Houston, Busi Mhlongo and Boom Shaka. “My passion was also driven by my family members who were involved in the entertainment industry like my granduncle Tymon Mabaleka (a well-known former footballer for Highlanders) one of the founders of Gallo Records who was a music producer,” said Valee Music. She said she was glad she pursued her music passion as it has opened many doors for her. “I’m glad I’m following my vision as this opportunity has put me on amazing platforms like BBC Africa, Vox Africa and on radio stations and Blogs in America, Canada, Kenya, South Africa and United Kingdom. “I also opened for Zimfestival UK last year which had 5 000 people in attendance. Also, working with the likes of Charlie Kay & Gemma Griffiths has been amazing.” When things normalise, the artiste said she wants to visit Bulawayo and perform for people in her hometown.