The Chronicle STUART Broad’s 500th Test wicket sent England on the way to completing a series victory over West Indies on the final day of the third Test at Emirates Old Trafford. Broad had Kraigg Brathwaite lbw to become only the fourth pace bowler and second England player after James Anderson to reach the landmark, and would later take the final wicket to complete his third 10-wicket haul in Tests. Brathwaite was the first man to fall, West Indies having resumed on 10-2 chasing 399 or, more likely, needing to bat out the day. Chris Woakes claimed 5-50 as England dodged the showers to bowl West Indies out for 129, win by 269 runs and take the series 2-1. After being beaten in the first Test in Southampton, England have come from behind to win a three-match series for the first time since 2008. They also regain the Wisden Trophy and end the series third in the World Test Championship, behind India and Australia. In a congested schedule, an entirely separate England squad play three one-day internationals against Ireland in the next week before the first of three Tests against Pakistan begins on August 5. West Indies, so competitive for much of the tour, remain without a series victory in the UK since 1988 and have now been beaten on seven consecutive trips to this country. This was not only Broad’s moment to join an elite club; just six other bowlers of any kind have reached 500 in Tests, but also further vindication after he so publicly voiced his displeasure at being left out of the first match of the series. Since returning, he has taken 16 wickets at 10.93. In this match alone he picked up 10-67 to go with the 62 runs he scored in England’s first innings. To still be so determined at the age of 34 is typical of such a fierce competitor, whose 140-Test career has been characterised by spectacular spells and has taken in four Ashes wins. Broad’s 500th wicket came 40 minutes in, after a break for rain, when the hopping Brathwaite was hit dead in front by a full delivery. He was congratulated with a hug from his great friend and new-ball partner Anderson, then raised the ball in the direction of the dressing room; the empty stadium denying the celebrations the achievement deserved. Fittingly, Broad returned to seal victory. The first ball of a new spell was nothing but a long hop, but Jermaine Blackwood gloved a pull down the leg side to a diving Jos Buttler to make Broad only the seventh England player to take 10 wickets and score a half-century in a single Test. Much of the talk around the England side during this series has been about the identity of their best fast-bowling line-up, particularly given the need to manage workloads and plan for the eventual retirements of Broad and Anderson. Despite having a better average in England than any of his team-mates, Woakes may have been left out of this match had Ben Stokes been fit to bowl, but he ends the series as the home side’s second-highest wicket-taker behind Broad. West Indies’ cavalier approach made for some attractive strokeplay and regular chances for England to take wickets. Shai Hope miscued a pull at Woakes to Broad at mid-on and Shamarh Brooks’ waft gave an inside edge behind, before Roston Chase was run out by Dom Bess’ superb direct hit. This will forever be remembered as the first Test series to be played behind closed doors and in a bio-secure environment. It is to West Indies’ great credit they made the trip at all and even without Darren Bravo, Shimron Hetmyer and Keemo Paul, who opted out because of coronavirus concerns, they have played their part in producing a compelling and fluctuating contest. Beginning with both sides taking a knee as part of the Black Lives Matter movement, the tourists were superb in Southampton, securing a memorable victory by chasing 200 to win on the final day. But they have been beaten twice at Emirates Old Trafford, opting to bowl first after winning the toss on both occasions, and they gradually ran out of steam – perhaps not surprising given they have spent all but one week since 9 June in the same Manchester hotel. However, in Brathwaite, Brooks and Chase, they have the basis of a solid batting line-up, while captain Holder, Kemar Roach and Shannon Gabriel form a fearsome pace attack. Their steady improvement in Test cricket is well placed to continue. ‘We owe the West Indies a great deal’ Former England captain Michael Vaughan: “England are a better team in these conditions but we owe the West Indies a great deal. “I dread to think where the game would be in this country right now if they hadn’t agreed to come over.” West Indies all-rounder Carlos Brathwaite: “The West Indies team ran out of steam. They were here for a month before the first Test and chomping at the bit to play at Southampton. “They did and that game is the blueprint for how West Indies will win Tests – bowl the opposition out cheaply and get just past that total then do it again. 