The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
REDCLIFF Municipality has embarked on an valuation process of some of its properties with a view of leasing them out so as to derive some financial value through commercial use. The local authority has resorted to leasing out council properties that include bars, sports and recreation facilities as well as tuck-shops, most of which have been lying idle for long periods. The local authority has been facing cash inflow challenges recently and is looking forward to boosting its coffers by leasing the properties that have not been utilized for a long time. The move also comes as the local authority slashed workers’ salaries by 50 percent due to the adverse impact of Covid-19 on cash inflows. Redcliff Mayor, Councillor Clayton Masiyatsva, said the properties to be leased includes bars, sports and recreational facilities. “We have decided to lease out the bars and other open spaces suitable for tuck-shops. We have since advertised and started the process of registering those who are interested,” he said. Talks said to be ongoing between the local authority and the defunct steel company, Zisco so that Redcliff takes full charge of some recreational facilities that have not been used following the closure of the steel company a decade ago. “We are in talks with Zisco so that we can be in charge of facilities like Zisco Club, and Torwood Stadium so that we can also lease them out. The discussions are still ongoing so I can only update when we conclude the talks,” said Cllr Masiyatsva. Meanwhile, water situation in the town continue improving after the local authority completed a 2kilometere long pipeline that supplies water to Torwood. Torwood residents last received portable water in 2013 and the construction of the pipeline come as a major relief to the residents. “We have managed to complete the 2kilometre long pipeline and the residents are now accessing portable water. They last received water in 2003 but now water is now easily accessible,” said Cllr Masiyatsva. Redcliff, which relies on Kwekwe City for water supplies, has been facing water challenges for close to a decade following the folding of operations at Ziscosteel. The local authority is in the process of constructing its own water treatment plant.