The Chronicle Leonard Ncube,Victoria Falls Reporter
VICTORIA Falls council which had agreed to review its $354 million budget downwards,has now made a U-turn saying the move will cripple services. Pressured by residents, councillors and management had initially agreed to review the budget downwards but council’s finance committee last week said the move would cripple council operations. Councillors have since implored management to find others sources of revenue, which includes the sale of about 15 low density housing stands. Speaking during a full council meeting last week, councillors said while residents’ financial capacity has been reduced by Covid-19, reviewing the budget downwards will be a disaster. Finance Committee deputy chair Councillor Prince Thuso Moyo said the $354 million was not enough hence management should find other sources of revenue. “We might be forced to cut down on services unless we find other sources of revenue,” said Clr Thuso. Mayor Clr Somveli Dlamini said since council had resolved not to review the budget downwards, councillors should explain to residents the reasoning behind the decision. “We should go and explain to residents why we came up with this decision. Management should come up with cost cutting measures because what we are geting from residents is not enough,” said Clr Dlamini. Ward 1 Clr Marguerite Varley urged council to consider the fact that most residents are not employed as a result of the lockdown. “Let’s consider the option of selling stands by public auction. I know it’s not people friendly but we will make more money that will cushion us,” she said. Deputy Mayor Clr Patricia Mwale said council was in a Catch-22 situation. “The majority of people were employed in tourism and are out of jobs at the moment. Reviewing downwards might reduce council’s capacity while increasing it will put a strain on residents. “We are found in a catch-22 situation where we need money but at the same time we should not forget our residents,” said Clr Mwale. — @ncubeleon