The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
THE Zimbabwe Red Cross Society (ZRCS) has donated two ventilators to the United Bulawayo Hospitals (UBH) to be used by critical Covid-19 patients. ZRCS national president Mr Edson Mlambo handed over the ventilators to acting chief executive officer Dr Narcissus Dzvanga yesterday. The ventilators are part of the five that were donated by the Chinese Red Cross Society to its sister organisation in the country. The other three were donated to Parirenyatwa Group of Hospitals in Harare. Mr Mlambo said they made the donation in fulfillment of their humanitarian mandate while complementing Government in provision of health care. “The ZRCS is an auxiliary, it plays an auxiliary role to the Government. It provides an extended hand to Government. Where we can provide humanitarian assistance, we come in. That is why we are here in Bulawayo with this gift that we are having,” said Mr Mlambo. “These two ventilators were sourced from our friends the Chinese Red Cross Society. After the donation was made, we sat down to decide where to allocate them. Fortunately, UBH came to the limelight and it was decided that we send the machines to UBH.” He said Chinese Red Cross Society technicians will assist in installing the equipment starting tomorrow. Mr Mlambo appealed to hospitals to engage ZRCS trained nurse aides. “We train nurse aides; we always beg and appeal to our hospitals to make it a routine that you take our students so that they gain experience. Please consider us on your nurse aide plans,” Mr Mlambo. Dr Dzvanga expressed gratitude to ZRCS for the donation as the hospital has been struggling to buy the equipment. “They have come in handy. We have been trying to buy these ventilators for years even before there was Covid-19. They are very handy assets to us and we can never stop thanking them for bringing this. We are anticipating another six from Higher Life Foundation but for today the Red Cross has made our day,” said Dr Dzvanga. He said ventilators were very important in the management of critical Covid-19 patients. “It’s a treatment tool or asset for the very sick or critical cases who are unable to sustain lives through their normal breathing. That is where it comes in. Luckily, nationally we have not had patients who require ventilators. We are not sure what is protecting us. We have a lot of positives but few admissions and few severe cases. These machines are coming at a time when we are seeing an increase in Covid-19 cases but we are hoping we will continue to see positive patients who do not require to be admitted to the intensive care unit,” he said. — @nqothsili