The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
THE corporate world has been urged to utilise the deferment of schools opening to source resources and assist Government to ensure readiness when the learning institutions open. Last Tuesday, Cabinet deferred the reopening of schools from July 28 to a later date as President Mnangagwa will soon announce tightened lockdown regulations in view of a spike in local transmissions with Bulawayo among the hotspots as of yesterday. Government has made big strides in achieving such and part of these efforts include the channeling of $350 million which the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education received from the Treasury to acquire more than four million face masks among other materials needed to prevent the spread of Covid-19. Addressing delegates from the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education at the Mhlahlandlela Complex in Bulawayo at a donation of Protective Personal Equipment to rural schools, Matabeleland North Provincial Education Officer (PED) Mr Jabulani Mpofu said they were pleased with donations that have been coming from the private sector and urged them to continue the good gesture. “It is our role as Zimbabweans to unite for a good cause and fight the spread of Covid-19 and the deferment of opening of schools is a blessing in disguise for us to continue mobilising resources. “As we do for this for our pupils through these generous donations, there is no need to stop but to continue going forward. The donation of infrared thermometers is a short in the arm as we had shortage for all the schools in the province,” said Mr Mpofu. The donation of 40 litres of concentrated sanitiser disinfectant and 40 infrared thermometers came from Lab Equipment Consumables BioTech, St Johns, Bulawayo Rotary Club and Elevate Trust a youth foundation that focuses on STEM education and careers, research, innovations and entrepreneurship. Elevate Trust representative Ms Samkele Xaba, on behalf of the organisation’s founder Ms Sicelo Dube, said their donation is driven by the need to promote education activities. “Coronavirus has come about with social disorder and disrupted livelihoods whereby social institutions which are in the societies. The closure of schools has led schools to be behind and through a campaign with our partners to assist rural school Safer Schools campaign which is aimed at making rural schools safer for learning in this pandemic. “It is a platform open to everyone to come and partner with us and thus we are reiterating the message of calling on partners to take this time to assist Government with resources for schools,” said Ms Xaba. — @mthabisi_mthire.