The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
GOVERNMENT will only contract reputable institutions in supplying Covid-19 materials after noting an increase in briefcase companies that are tendering to provide the equipment. Cabinet also resolved to financially capacitate Bulawayo and Harare provinces so that they adequately supply water to residents during the Covid-19 period and beyond. Treasury has since disbursed $27,54 million to the Zimbabwe National Water Authority (ZINWA) and the District Development Fund (DDF) for countrywide drilling and rehabilitation of boreholes. It also approved that returning residents opting to quarantine in centres of their choice, can do so if the facilities are secure and can be subject to inspection by health and security officials. So far, Government has managed to isolate 3 611 returnees in quarantine centres countrywide to combat the spread of Covid-19. Among the returning residents, Government has also managed to weed out criminals that skipped borders to evade arrests. Government has set up a Covid-19 Command Centre headed by the Civil Protection Unit (CPU) to direct and coordinate all Covid-19 operations including identifying hotspots and troubleshoot on emerging deadly virus. Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa announced these measures yesterday during a post-Cabinet briefing.
Minister Mutsvangwa said Government remains cautiously optimistic that measures being implemented to prevent the spread of Covid-19 were effective due to low infection and death rates. As of Monday, the country had recorded 37 Covid-19 cases, 12 recoveries and four deaths since Zimbabwe recorded its first case in March with more than 23 000 tests conducted. Said Minister Mutsvangwa: “Cabinet notes with concern the mushrooming of briefcase companies which are being involved in the tendering process for Covid-19 supplies. Government will leave no stone unturned in ensuring that such unscrupulous business elements are sifted out.” She said Cabinet also reaffirmed the need to continuously improve the conditions of service in the health sector to minimise exposure to Covid-19. — @nqotshili