The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
NATIONAL Association of Secondary Schools Heads (Nash) is awaiting Government’s decision on reopening of schools to revise its sporting programmes. Already, the country’s premier schools football tournament, Copa Coca-Cola, that traditionally takes place in July has been moved to the third term. The Copa Coca-Cola tournament is for the girls’ and boys’ Under-15 age group. Nash president Arthur Maphosa said since the prestigious competition is for non-exam classes, it can be played in third term. The competitions for Under-18s and Under-20s still hangs in the balance. Proton and Surrey bankroll an Under-20 football competition, while Tanganda sponsors netball. “Everything has been on hold and we can only wait for the Government’s announcement so that we know how to plan for activities. As you are aware, all sporting activities were banned because of Covid-19 and we stand guided by what the government will say. On a positive note, sponsors of Copa Coca-Cola have not objected to the competition being moved to third term. We are yet to engage Tanganda and Proton. We hope to engage these sponsors sometime this week,” said Maphosa. According to an earlier programme, Mpopoma High School in Bulawayo was supposed to host the launch of the Copa Coca-Cola at the beginning of May. Mpopoma made history in the Copa Coca-Cola national finals in Kadoma last year when they defeated Nyamauru 5-4 on penalties to become the first ever school from Bulawayo to lift the girls title since sponsorship for females was introduced in 2011. Traditionally, the right to host the event has been given to the winners of the boys’ section, with that custom was only done away with once in 2015 when Chidyamakono from Masvingo hosted the event. The launch would have set the tone for the tournament at district, provincial and eventually national finals, which are scheduled for Masvingo. A video conference call took place between Nash and the sponsors, in which the sponsors expressed willingness to continue funding the tournament that started in 1989. — @ZililoR