The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
THERE is a drive to form an umbrella body for Zimbabwean DJs, one that if done properly, will see the country’s wheel spinners being represented as artistes in their own right. The DJs Association of Zimbabwe (DJAZ) is in its infancy stage as consultations are being made on how the organisation will be structured. As it stands the DJAZ has an interim committee with the likes of DJ Dollarbill as the chairperson and Dee Nosh as his vice. The secretary is DJ Blaze with DJ Wanco as his vice. DJ Bedzo is the interim treasurer deputised by DJ Mzoe. Committee members include Godfather Templeman, DJs Storm, Nospa, Liz, Hustler, Crocxz, Nash, Quick, Fatso, Jacha and Maestro. The patrons are Regoman, Kaycee the Gigmaster, DJ Keitho, Emity Smooth with two ceremonial posts reserved for National Arts Council of Zimbabwe director Nicholas Moyo and the Deputy Minister of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation Tinomudaishe Machakaire. It seems that the DJs have taken advantage of the lockdown to come up with a definitive structure for their profession, which seems to be taken for granted by some in the arts industry. Recently, as Government called on artistes whose livelihood had been affected by the Covid-19 pandemic to submit their names to the National Arts Council of Zimbabwe for assistance, some DJs did not submit their names as they were of the notion that they were not being recognised as artistes. So, as people who were also affected by the pandemic, they penned a letter calling on well-wishers to assist them. They (especially Club DJs) came under fire as some people vowed not to support them claiming that they were not supportive of the local arts industry since they play mostly foreign music. Due to this sabotage, the DJs in their various groups discussed and came to the realisation that they needed to unite and speak using one voice. Bernard “DJ Bedzo” Chambati of Zim Events who is the DJs association’s spokesperson said it took Covid-19 for some DJs to see that they needed to speak in one voice. “We’ve had this (association) in place from as far as 2015 as a draft concept. Since then, DJs couldn’t come together as some were reluctant to join. But with this Covid-19 pandemic, when we asked for assistance and all the bashing we received, we realised that no one would help us as individuals hence the need of an association,” said DJ Bedzo. He said on Tuesday, they met with members of the National Arts Council of Zimbabwe in Harare who are now helping them to come up with the structures for DJs. DJ Bedzo said the association is open to all DJs. “The association is open to everyone who is a DJ as we’re compiling a database through the committees around Zimbabwe. In Bulawayo we have DJs Nospa and Mzoe as the point people. “From there, we’ll iron out our constitution through WhatsApp groups as we can’t meet physically because of Covid-19. Thereafter, we shall hold an AGM to elect office bearers,” said DJ Bedzo. — @bonganinkunzi