The Chronicle Frequent or excessive alcohol consumption can increase your risk of health problems. Being able to hold your breath for 10 seconds or more without coughing or feeling discomfort DOES NOT mean you are free from the coronavirus disease (Covid-19) or any other lung disease. The most common symptoms of Covid-19 are dry cough, tiredness and fever. Some people may develop more severe forms of the disease, such as pneumonia. The best way to confirm if you have the virus producing Covid-19 disease is with a laboratory test. You cannot confirm it with this breathing exercise, which can even be dangerous. You can recover from the coronavirus disease (Covid-19). Catching the new coronavirus DOES NOT mean you will have it for life. Most of the people who catch Covid-19 can recover and eliminate the virus from their bodies. If you catch the disease, make sure you treat your symptoms. If you have cough, fever, and difficulty breathing, seek medical care early — but call your health facility by telephone first. Most patients recover thanks to supportive care. Drinking methanol, ethanol or bleach DOES NOT prevent or cure Covid-19 and can be extremely dangerous. Methanol, ethanol, and bleach are poisons. Drinking them can lead to disability and death. Methanol, ethanol, and bleach are sometimes used in cleaning products to kill the virus on surfaces – however you should never drink them. They will not kill the virus in your body and they will harm your internal organs. To protect yourself against Covid-19, disinfect objects and surfaces, especially the ones you touch regularly. You can use diluted bleach or alcohol for that. Make sure you clean your hands frequently and thoroughly and avoid touching your eyes, mouth and nose. Spraying and introducing bleach or another disinfectant into your body WILL NOT protect you against Covid-19 and can be dangerous Do not under any circumstance spray or introduce bleach or any other disinfectant into your body. These substances can be poisonous if ingested and cause irritation and damage to your skin and eyes. Bleach and disinfectant should be used carefully to disinfect surfaces only. Remember to keep chlorine (bleach) and other disinfectants out of reach of children. — WHO