The Chronicle Lenox Lizwi Mhlanga THE Covid-19 pandemic is a major crisis like no other. No company has ever imagined a scenario of this magnitude. From a crisis communications’ point of view, the situation we find ourselves in looks indefinite. The United Kingdom has already extended their lockdown by an additional three weeks, so go figure. We have already seen how the pandemic ticks all the boxes of a major crisis. It’s defined as an inherently abnormal and complex situation that represents a threat to strategic objectives, the reputation or even the existence of an organisation. The impact to business, both small and large, with the inevitable loss of jobs and closure is immense. In Zimbabwe, we have seen businesses that have taken the cautious approach in the current crisis by temporarily shutting down operations. We are witnesses to the flurry of internal memos on social media confirming this. This is just a sneak preview of what companies are dealing with communicating during a crisis. “It is never a matter of if, but a matter of when crises happen. Crises are inevitable and it is how leaders and organisations respond to these crises that shapes how they will be judged in the eyes of employees and other stakeholders,” wrote Thandolwenkosi Nkomo, a public relations researcher, strategist and trainer last week in another publication. Business leaders know that managing a crisis is an inevitable part of their role. However, when the chips are down, they tend to worry how this would look to the outside world. In past crises, I have observed executives concentrate their communication efforts on stakeholders — perhaps investors, regulators or highly vocal consumers — while neglecting customers, suppliers or employees. It’s important to address all the organisation’s stakeholders without exceptions. Given the fact that the biggest impact is assumed to be on the brand’s image and organisational reputation, such an approach sounds logical. However, when an organisation is in a crisis such as the Covid-19 pandemic, it is the workers that are impacted hardest. Therefore, communications around the crisis should be focused internally as well. After all, a company’s employees are their most valuable asset and their welfare should be of upmost concern to employers. Planning and implementing a crisis communication plan for them ensures internal stability. There is the need to closely manage the messaging in the era of social media. Business leaders have to control the narrative before anxiety and rumour set in. In PwC’s (PricewaterhouseCoopers) latest Global Crisis Survey, the multinational professional services network of firms says that a major crisis demands that business leaders engage remote and frontline employees with real-time, personal, consistent communications about health and safety, policy updates and guidance from leadership. It is for this reason that a company’s messaging during a crisis should be authentic. The intention is not only to counter misinformation, but to help to ensure continuity in the operations of the business, even when employees are working from home. Employees need factual information to deal with their fears and use this to process how the crisis impacts on their work. This helps employees understand the situation in an environment of mutual trust with the employer. Workers need assurances around what is happening now and how adversely it affects their jobs. Sharing the right information to the right people through their favourite channels and platforms is advisable. Which is why some innovative companies are keeping in touch with their workers via social messaging platforms such as WhatsApp or video-conferencing via Zoom calls. The PwC report advises business leaders to be transparent and forthright about the health of their business and any workforce actions they intend to take, especially the possibility of furloughs or layoffs. Uncertainty and confusion may contribute to anxiety and fear, but clear information can help employees feel more informed and better able to focus. The report further advises that employers should aim for honest and frequent communications that underscore a strong sense of purpose. During a crisis, it’s more important than ever that people understand why their work matters and how they are personally helping to contribute to the success of the business even when there are dark clouds looming. While protecting the company’s image and reputation is a top priority, people should realise that employees are a business’ best brand ambassadors especially when the chips are down. They can either protect or damage the reputation depending on how they are treated. If employee relations are good, then there is little to worry about. Just by ensuring that whatever happens, they are kept in the loop; leaders will get the much needed buy-in for all their communication efforts. We all look forward to the time when this epidemic will be a thing of the past. At that point, communicating with employees will be essential for them to have a better understanding of what happened and how their actions and attitudes will help in the recovery process. There will be plenty of lessons to share when the crisis hopefully ends. Open discussions among employees about their experiences are encouraged to help them heal and rebuilding trust in a disrupted workplace. A crisis that is well managed is one where a well-coordinated approach involves everyone, all being on the same page, knowing what their role is, and there is maximum co-operation. Business leaders who are concerned about the vulnerability of their employees and are empathetic to their situation, tend to find riding the crisis that much easier. Finally, humility, a valuable leadership attribute in the best of times, is a plus when weathering the Covid-19 storm. In the meantime, let us all stay at home and be safe.