The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
AFRICAN countries have been challenged to double their efforts towards combating Covid-19 and stop expecting foreigners to solve the continent’s problems as it charts a new path towards prosperity. The continent yesterday marked the 57th anniversary of Africa Day. The day is commemorated annually on May 25 to reflect on the continent’s achievements, challenges and opportunities. More than 100 000 Covid-19 cases have been recorded across Africa with 40 000 recoveries and 3 000 deaths. African Union (AU) chairperson and South African President Cyril Ramaphosa, delivering his Africa Day message online yesterday, said the commemorations come at a time when the world is grappling with the severe impact of the global pandemic. He said the virus threatens AU’s 2063 agenda for a peaceful, united and prosperous continent. “At the same time this global pandemic should enable a new Africa to come to the fore. It should be an Africa of heroic acts, of solidarity, an Africa of cross border collaborations and sharing of knowledge and resources. An Africa that is united by a common goal. “The challenge of this pandemic has shown how Africa is able to work together to solve its own problems. Day by day across our continent, we are seeing the unity that is our strength being put to the service of saving lives and supporting the vulnerable,” he said. President Ramaphosa hailed the frontline workers in the medical field for the contributions they have made towards fighting Covid-19. He said no country could overcome Covid-19 without the help of other nations. “We thank the patriots in our continent and our friends in the international community for showing solidarity during this difficult time. We know that no country can overcome this challenge alone. “We urge all developed countries, multilateral institutions and the donor community to provide vulnerable communities across the world especially, on our continent with the necessary support in the form of diagnostic and therapeutic medical supplies as well as the necessary financial support to sustain livelihoods of the vulnerable people,” he said. “We repeat our call for a comprehensive robust stimulus package for Africa that includes debt relief and other support measures for the continent’s immediate humanitarian needs and economic recovery.” President Ramaphosa reiterated his call for the unconditional lifting of sanctions imposed on Zimbabwe and Sudan for the two countries to effectively fight Covid-19. AU Commission chairperson Mr Moussa Faki Mahamat in his Africa Day message yesterday said in light of the global pandemic, Africa should chart its own course, challenging the continent’s leaders across all spheres to effectively contribute towards the development of the region. “The Covid-19 pandemic brutally reminds us of a major issue, which is the imperative need to put a stop to dependency on the exterior. “This can be achieved through the two-fold objective of living on our own resources, and resolutely focusing on our industrialisation process. Other entities with less resource than we have, were able to achieve this in record time,” said Mr Mahamat. “I strongly urge women, youth, intellectuals, academics, politicians, entrepreneurs, and civil society activists, to engage in fruitful and active discussions on the issue, which is key to our material survival, our independence, our freedom and our dignity.” He said innovations should drive Africa’s development agenda as opposed to donor dependency. “There is an urgent need for Africa to chart its own course. Its food dependency and insecurity are unacceptable and intolerable, as is the state of its roads, ports, health and educational infrastructure. Africa’s land, forests, rich fauna, mines, energy potential, and maritime and inland waterways, hold the necessary resources to provide an adequate response to the needs of its peoples. We should, in full lucidity, boldly opt for an innovative approach that is inward-looking rather than outward-looking. Let us live on what we have, using what we have, in other words let us live within our means,” he said. Mr Mahamat said Covid-19 has left humanity fragile and impotent. He said African countries have shocked the world with the way they have handled Covid-19 cases. The continent remains with very low figures compared to the rest of the world. “Right from the onset the pandemic, much to the surprise of those who have always belittled the continent, Africa mobilised itself. A continental response strategy was developed and implemented promptly,” he said. “I would like to pay a well-deserved tribute to the specialised organs of the Union in charge of this implementation, as well as to the current Chairperson of our Union, His Excellency Cyril Ramaphosa, for the pertinent initiatives taken. My tribute also goes to all our Member States, which in a remarkable manner, promptly took appropriate measures, consistent with the continental strategy.” Mr Mahamat said the continent should come up with Covid-19-resilient measures through providing food sufficiency and create millions of jobs for vulnerable Africans. In his Africa Day speech, President Mnangagwa on Sunday challenged Africa to pursue the vision of the founding fathers and promote economic integration and sustainable development for the continent. He said the continent should continue pursuing its 2063 developmental agenda. In a statement posted on Twitter the President said: On #AfricaDay2020 we remember the sacrifices of those who fought for our freedom, and re-dedicate ourselves to the eternal cause of unity, justice and development. Let us work together to build a fully integrated continent, a haven of peace, love and stability. Long Live Africa!”— @nqotshili