The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
SPECIAL Advisor to the President on Disability issues, Dr Joshua Malinga has called on members of the public to support people living with disabilities during the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic. The call comes as most people living with disabilities are struggling to fend for themselves. Besides putting food on the table, in light of the transport challenges in most cities and towns due to the public service provider Zupco being overwhelmed, people living with disabilities are unable to travel freely around the city. Speaking at a donation of groceries by Eden Smile Trust (EST) and Michael Tinotenda Foundation (MTF) at John Smale children’s home yesterday, Dr Malinga said: “Members of the public should be able to appreciate people living with disabilities and desist from name-calling them. “Disability to me is how you are treated in a society and people should accept that we have differences, I have my own way of doing my things and thus as a nation we should unite and tolerate each other.” Handing over the groceries which were distributed to Government run institutions; John Smale children’s home, St Francis at Ingutsheni and Qinisani Children’s Home, EST founder Ms Tafadzwa Gumede and MTF founder Mrs Fadzai Rusiye said they will be rolling out programmes to the children’s home in order to assist the minors in future when they move out from the homes. “As faith-based organisations, we have a role to play in the society. “Our aim is to ensure that when the children housed at these institutions go out to the world, they are able to fend for themselves. This will be achieved by offering them social skills development programmes, financial literacy programmes, sewing and carpentry classes among other initiatives,” said Mrs Rusiye. John Smale superintendent Mrs Eveline Shura said the donation would feed 48 children housed at the institution. The children on their own are running piggery production, vegetable farming and cattle rearing to help them grow up with knowledge and appreciation of agriculture. — @mthabisi_mthire.