The Chronicle Business Reporter 
THE African Seed Trade Association and the Alliance for Commodity Trade in Eastern and Southern Africa have recommended unrestricted movement of seed commodities across the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (Comesa) region to enhance food production. Countries within the Comesa bloc and the world at large have imposed restrictions on cross border movement following the outbreak of the Covid-19 global pandemic as part of emergency measures to stop the spread of the disease. Due to the Covid-19 health guidelines, the Africa Seed Trade Association and ACTESA, have predicted the potential of food insecurity within the Comesa region, which will leave 123 million people starved if seed movement across the borders in the region is not normalised in the next six months. “The African Seed Trade Association (AFSTA) and ACTESA recommend classification of seeds as essential commodities that should be allowed unrestricted movement across the region. “If the seed movement is not normalised in the next six months, 123 million out of 650 million people in the Comesa region will face starvation,” according to a joint statement issued by the two organisations. ACTESA is a specialised agency of Comesa formed to address staple food production and marketing in the region. ACTESA seed expert Dr John Mukuka pointed out that a few countries have reported difficulties in moving seeds across borders. He said if the trend continues, there would be inadequate harvests, a situation that will lead to food insecurity, malnutrition and hunger in the Comesa and African countries, in the next few months. “Closing borders or even slowing down the trans-boundary movement of seeds could create a significant problem in the seed supply chain,” Dr Mukuka said, noting that regional countries need to ensure access to quality and improved seed for the 80 million small scale farmers in the Comesa region and beyond. He observed that no country today could fully supply farmers with quality seed of their choice solely from their own production. There is therefore a need for companies to produce seed in different countries all over the world including Comesa, to mitigate the risk of crop failures due to adverse weather conditions. “By finding optimal locations for seed production, timing of harvest, and localised expertise, the seed sector ensures steady supply of seed for farmers everywhere in the region and globally,” he said. Dr Mukuka said ACTESA and AFSTA appeals to member States to allow free movement of seed at this time of the year in line with international standard practice of seed trade and in conformity with Comesa Seed Harmonisation Implementation Plan (Comship). This includes facilitating the movement of seed within the region in line with the Comesa Harmonised Seed Trade Regulations, application of phytosanitary measures for seed only for pests, which are not common to all Comesa countries and use of the Comesa Regional Seed certificates and labels for all seed meeting the Comesa Seed Standards. Since 2010 ACTESA has been working with AFSTA on the implementation of Comship. AFSTA has more than 118 members from 39 countries of which 27 are National Seed Trade Associations in Africa and 44 associate members worldwide.