The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIFA has hailed legendary midfielder Esrom Nyandoro for his philanthropic work after he donated mealie meal and other groceries to 300 needy households in Mzilikazi suburb last week. Nyandoro, who is based in South Africa where he is head of scouting for his former team Mamelodi Sundowns, grew up in the football-rich suburb where he started playing on the streets before his first professional contract with Zimbabwe Saints and later Amazulu. Following the Covid-19 pandemic that led to the national lockdown, a number of informal traders that relied on vending were left with no source of income and unable to fend for their families. The former midfield maestro was touched by their plight and decided to donate food hampers worth more than $240 000. “The Zimbabwe Football Association is grateful to Warriors legend Esrom Nyandoro for the great generosity he displayed by donating mealie meal and other grocery items to needy families in Bulawayo negatively affected by the Covid-19 pandemic. The association appreciates this great philanthropic gesture and may God bless him,” Zifa said in paying tribute to Nyandoro. Beneficiaries of the donations also paid emotional tributes to Nyandoro, who they constantly described as their son. “I would like to thank the great job done by our child, who grew up in G-square, Esrom Nyandoro for him to remember where he came from and donate this mealie meal to the elderly who dominate our community and are unable to fend for themselves,” Mzilikazi residents chairman Jacob Magutshwa told Television Sports Media. Nyandoro had initially offered to auction his sentimental national team and Mamelodi Sundowns jerseys, but a bidder decided to underwrite the auction and returned the items to the football star. The bidder chose to remain anonymous, although it’s believed to be South African billionaire and Mamelodi Sundowns owner Patrice Motsepe. Meanwhile, Nyandoro has launched a foundation to help the needy and this week began a crowd-funding initiative via his Facebook timeline. “There are children and families that need us to plant a light of hope during this difficult time and we aim to do this by feeding them and providing education and shelter wherever we can. I call upon all of you to help me do this,” said Nyandoro.