The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
AT this rate, the Fergusons (Shona and Connie) may just wake up one day to an empty set on their drama, The Queen, as they seem to be headed the Generations route due to the mass exodus of actors in recent months. Watching productions like Igazi, The Throne, Rockville and The Queen, any upcoming actor would want to feature in their productions, but it seems the Fergusons are not the greatest as they have zero tolerance for nonsense. When working for them one has to be at their best behaviour as loyalty is everything to the Fergusons. This has been evidenced by the exodus of actors on one of their productions — The Queen which airs on Mzansi Magic during the week. Most actors have left this soapie under unclear circumstances with the only main actors remaining being Connie (Harriet Mathapelo Khoza), Shona (Jerry Maake) and Themba Ndaba (Brutus). The others are new entries or mere extras who cannot sustain the soapie. Effects of this exodus of actors are now showing as most who watch the show, are continuously expressing displeasure saying it is no longer interesting. One of the first actors to leave was Marah Louw (Sis Boi) in 2018, who had a messy exit after she apparently had a dispute with producers over copyright infringements. The producers apparently wanted her to act out a scene which resembled what she had written in her biography. She was against this and before she knew it, her contract was terminated, leaving her bitter as she felt show producers had “treated her like trash”. As a result of Louw’s unwarranted departure from the show, former actress, Vatiswa Ndara who also worked with The Fergusons on another production, Igazi, penned an open letter highlighting the terrible treatment she received as well as other actors at the hands of Ferguson Films. Ndara cast the spotlight on alleged “bullying and exploitation” of actors by the Fergusons through the letter which she addressed to Arts and Culture Minister Nathi Mthethwa. For speaking out against the Fergusons, Louw said she was blacklisted as she could not secure an acting gig for a long time. “Since I spoke out, I have been blacklisted. I have not worked since 2017. It’s a cruel industry. I have been told by a few producers that they would love to work with me but they have been told that I am impossible to work with and complain about money. “I was told by another producer that he wanted to work with me but was told not to. I now live by the grace of God,” Louw told TimesLive in October last year. Khanya Mkangisa, who played the role of Akhona, was allegedly fired from the show after a drunk-driving incident in May 2019. Crowd favourite, Sithembiso Khoza (Shaka Khoza) was also allegedly fired by the Fergusons last year as they felt he was difficult to work with as his personal life got in the way of work. “He’s always in trouble. If he’s not delaying production, he’s involved in child support drama that has been following him to work. He’s not the same person (that) he was. It’s as if fame changed him,” a source told Channel24. Khoza however, disputed this saying he had worked hard and had received a contract with Ferguson Films for another show called Kings of Joburg. Producers simply said his character was no longer fitting in the storyline. After making her way into the hearts of many viewers of the show, another top actor, Rami Chuene (Gracious “T-Gom” Mabuza) left the show unceremoniously in January this year. Without saying much about her departure “as advised by her legal team”, one could tell that Chuene had left involuntarily. It later emerged that the relationship between Chuene and the Fergusons had been tense ever since Chuene publicly sided with Ndara against the Fergusons when she called out the couple’s production for unfair treatment and underpaying actors. “Behind the scenes, Rami often took the younger actors’ side and was loud when it came to matters of unfair labour practises,” sources told SundayWorld.
Much-loved Dineo Mokoetsi who acted as The Queen — Harriet Khoza’s daughter Kea’s exit recently left the show’s viewers shaken as they clearly did not see that one coming. Apparently, Mokoetsi was also taken by surprise after the Fergusons communicated to her that they would be terminating her contract while she was on lockdown. According to SundayWorld, Mokoetsi was fired allegedly after asking for a three-month break to shoot a movie. The actress, who has been with the Mzansi Magic soapie since its inception four years ago, was allegedly sent a letter by Ferguson Films informing her that she should not bother reporting for duty after the lockdown. Other actors who are reported to be on their way out are Zenande Mfenyana (Goodness Mabuza) and Cindy Mahlangu (Siyanda) for various reasons. Setumo Motsoaledi (Mmabatho) also exited the soapie recently. With all these people leaving, one wonders if the Fergusons are too hard on their actors or if it is their actors who begin to grow big heads once the fame kicks in and become difficult to work with. Either way, these departures have definitely affected the telenovela which is constantly failing to clinch awards at various shows, save for the likes of Thembsie Matu who acts as Patronella who won several awards last year for her role. Either way, people have pleaded with the Fergusons to take it easy on the firing of actors especially considering that they too are actors and know how the industry operates.