The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
SOUTH Africa-based Zimbabwean heavyweight boxer Elvis Moyo is hopeful that last week’s Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) fights staged in Florida, United States of America, might pave the way for more bouts to take place in empty venues. Moyo, who competes in boxing and the Extreme Fighting Championship (EFC) Africa, is one of many fighters whose livelihoods have been affected by the global shutdown of sporting activities due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The Johannesburg-based fighter, who goes by the stage name Bulawayo Bomber, believes relaxation of lockdown restrictions will afford him an opportunity to practice in the presence of his trainer and possibly a chance to fight in an empty venue. Moyo has been training in his backyard gym since start of the lockdown in March. “I’m not the only one in the world of boxing and EFC, who is probably thinking that since America has already staged three fights in an empty venue there is a possibility of that happening in Africa. I have since upped my training and with the relaxation of lockdown restrictions, I can travel to my trainer’s place for some sessions. What I want is to be ready in the event that I get a call to fight in an empty venue,” said Moyo. The UFC held three events in Florida within an eight-day period, beginning with UFC 249 on May 9, followed by cards on May 13 and May 16 at the VyStar Veterans Memorial Arena in Jacksonville without a live audience. The Florida State Boxing Commission said health and safety protocols to ensure the safety and well-being of all individuals involved in the events were done. UFC 249 was the second UFC event this year closed to the public after the UFC Fight Night event on March 14 in Brasilia, Brazil. UFC 249 was originally scheduled to take place on April 18 in Brooklyn and feature Description Khabib Nurmagomedov, the undisputed lightweight champion, against Tony Ferguson. It was one of six events the promotion was forced to postpone because of the coronavirus pandemic. Nurmagomedov, who was in his native Dagestan, was dropped from the card because of travel restrictions associated with the pandemic. Justin Gaethje beat Ferguson in the fifth round to win an interim lightweight belt in the UFC 249.
Gaethje will now face Nurmagomedov on a later date. — @ZililoR