The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
VETERAN First Division player Joseph Museve has come up with an innovative way of making money during the Covid-19 lockdown by offering physical training to health freaks for a fee. Museve, a former Railstars, Bantu Rovers, ZPC Hwange and Bulawayo Chiefs left-back, has been conducting fitness classes in Nkulumane. Now in the books of Southern Region Division One League side Mainline FC of Plumtree, the 35-year-old Museve says he has been able to sustain his family with money earned through the fitness classes. A fitness freak himself, Museve said he started with one person when the lockdown started in March, but that number has since grown to more than 20 people. Each person pays monthly to be trained by Museve. “It’s been a blessing in disguise for me in the sense that I’m able to get some money through fitness programmes I’m providing. When we were hit by the lockdown, I designed a way to keep fit by exercising at home and a female neighbour asked if I could train her since the gyms are closed. After about three days, more women from my neighbourhood came through, others wanting to lose weight, some wanting to maintain their fitness. The class grew bigger and it’s really interesting to drive these fitness freaks, while I also train,” said Museve. The left-footed player who has been assisting veteran coach Paul Moyo at Mainline, is among a host of local footballers whose income has been affected by the Covid-19 lockdown. Unlike Premiership players, most First Division footballers don’t have monthly salaries and rely on winning bonuses and camping allowances. Museve has been posting videos of his workout sessions on Facebook. “I think footballers or athletes can capitalise on the closure of gyms by being fitness trainers. There are a lot of people who need help with exercises and I believe footballers can earn something at the same time maintaining fitness by conducting such trainings. We run everyday from Nkulumane along Ntemba Road to Pumula East and back to Nkulumane. After our jog, we then do aerobics, which are a warm down and fun,” said Museve. With the start of the football season unknown, Museve said he’ll continue with his lessons. — @ZililoR