The Chronicle Business Reporter 
CASSAVA Fintech International (CFI), a subsidiary of Econet Global, has introduced an enhanced voice and video conferencing service that allows up to 20 people on one call. Inspired by the need to enhance business operations in the wake of Covid-19, the service, branded ‘Sasai TeamTalk’, has been unveiled as a promotional offer of free Sasai conference calling, between 8am and 5pm every Sunday until the end of the month. In a media update the company said the service was available through the Sasai all-in-one super App that allows users to pay, chat, and explore a vast range of services, content and has been unveiled in Zimbabwe first. Sasai TeamTalk will offer free voice and video conference service, with secure end-to-end encryption, that connects up to 20 people on a single call, compared to telcos and most other social media platforms that offer between five and eight people on a conference call, said the company. Cassava Smartech Zimbwbwe chief executive, Mr Eddie Chibi said: “The timing of this service could not have been more appropriate. Families, communities, industries and nations have been impacted by Covid-19 pandemic. “Lockdowns, working from home and social distancing have been introduced as some of the measures to stem the spread of the virus and flattern the curve. “However, for business, lockdown should not mean ‘shutdown’ and team meetings must still happen if productivity is to be maintained. For families, friends or churches, social distancing should not mean that they stop ‘seeing’ each other, talking to each other or having fellowship in cell groups because they can now use Sasai TeamTalk.” The Sasai super App already offers a language translator service with over 80 languages, 50 of which are African languages – including Shona and Ndebele. The innovative product was first launched in August 2019 and is already being used in 180 countries across the globe. Mr Chibi said following its launch in Zimbabwe, Sasai TeamTalk will be rolled out to other markets. He said the development of Sasai TeamTalk — offering was inspired by the need to achieve business continuity and to “close the distance” created between families and close social groups such as churches by social distancing. “Sasai TeamTalk offers a platform where they can get together and interact freely wherever they maybe – even across continents,” Mr Chibi said. As part of the promotion, he said Sasai data costs at any other time would be at half of the Whatsapp data costs until May 31, 2020, as a way to bring some relief to Zimbabweans. The Sasai super App can take up to 250 people in a chat group and allows international remittances from the United Kingdom, European Union and South Africa to Zimbabwe and over 30 countries across the world. During the Covid-19 epidemic, businesses are expected to use their resources and expertise to help combat the global pandemic. At the same time, the surge in employees, students, teachers and other professionals working from home has resulted in a sharp demand for digital ‘telecommuting’ tools such as voice and video conferencing, online collaboration and chat systems. Sasai chief operating officer, Mr Tapera Mushoriwa, said the Sasai TeamTalk feature was developed to address a critical need in the market.