The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
ZIMBABWEAN businesses should ride on technology driven solutions to widen their market base while mitigating against the adverse impact of Covid-19. As the global pandemic continues to frustrate business operations, experts believe technology driven solutions are the game changer. Industry and Commerce Matabeleland South provincial deputy director, Mr Richmond Ncube, said Covid-19 disruptions demand that companies be innovative and use online platforms to identify potential markets. He said the effects of the pandemic will be far reaching especially on the business community hence the need for players to adopt news ways of doing business in order to maximise on production. “Any business that will survive out of this pandemic is supposed to look beyond the traditional means of transacting business. In other words they must embrace electronic platforms where they can market, define their products and come up with appropriate pricing models that will attract consumers,” said Mr Ncube. “It’s not going to be business as usual in the current scenario and even after Covid-19. In order to survive businesses must take advantage of niches where they will locate themselves within a particular market segment, which is going to ensure that they continue to make profits.” Given that a majority of the country’s population is made up of youngsters and the middle aged, Mr Ncube said, any business that understands the demands of that particular population will do well. “Looking at the thrust of Government on devolution it means that companies are supposed to help develop and grow the GDP in their provinces, which eventually will grow the national GDP. “If they embrace these technologies and these methods of business transactions, they will definitely go a long way in lifting our economy,” he said. Mr Nqobizitha Sibanda who is a business analyst based in Gwanda and also former Zimbabwe National Chamber of Commerce (ZNCC) Matabeleland South vice- president, said while Covid-19 had brought challenges, businesses should seek to exploit new supply chains, which have emerged. He said companies must identify some essential resources needed during this period such as Covid-19 testing kits. Mr Sibanda said there was a need for training of business people in a bid to empower them on how to use technology for the growth of the businesses. “In this era there is no need to drive from place to place soliciting or marketing products as the marketing can be done online. In some countries people do not need to go to the shops as they can buy their groceries online and get them delivered. This is the direction we need to take. As a country we need to realise that we are far behind when it comes to the technological revolution,” he said. Mr Sibanda said some farmers were now selling their chickens online and delivering them to her customers. “Businesses need to be part of the fourth industrial revolution. We need to be innovative and come up with strategies to survive,” he said. — @DubeMatutu.