The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
Gweru City Council has shortlisted two construction companies to renovate vending stalls at Kudzanayi long distance bus terminus and Kombayi fresh produce markets. The council, working with Government, is also set to work on the Mtapa market upgrade, which will accommodate about 4 100 traders. Vendors operating in Gweru especially from Kudzanayi long distance bus terminus and Kombayi fresh produce markets, complied with the Government directive to voluntarily move their wares and pave way for the renovation of the market facilities. Government and the local authority are working towards a smart city design model, which is expected to be complete in the next six months. The smart city design will ensure the Kudzanayi facility has buses, travellers, traders selling refreshments and smart ablution facilities. Traders selling other items like clothes and fresh produce would be housed at Mtapa market. In an interview, Gweru Mayor, Councillor Josiah Makombe, said there was an adjudicating process last week at the town house where four companies presented their business proposals and how they intend to proceed with the work at hand. He said of the four, council and management were happy with two companies who have since been short-listed and they have six months’ time frame to complete the projects. “I’m glad to say there is progress in terms of rehabilitation or renovation of vending stalls at Kudzanayi long distance bus terminus, Kombayi fresh produce market and the new Mtapa market. Four companies presented their business proposals and we identified two for the projects. “One company will work at Kudzanayi and the other at Kombayi. We gave them six months to complete works needed,” said Cllr Makombe. He said as a condition for the deal, both companies will assist council with the Mtapa market project but would not reveal the figures involved. Cllr Makombe said the local authority preferred the companies that were willing to work or consult council in terms of rentals so that the vending stalls remain within reach of locals. Meanwhile, Cllr Makombe said some local companies have already brought in their resources to assist council with land development preparation at Mtapa market. “I’m happy to say that we have local companies and individuals that have brought equipment together to assist council develop Mtapa market so that we open it as soon as possible. These include Rungwe Mashwede who donated two backhoe loaders, River Valley Properties donated a water bowser, grader and one tipper, CMED donated a dozer. These are the ones on site so far,” he said.