The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
SOUTH AFRICA-based Kwaito musician Diliza (pictured) who was fortunate to get tutelage from the likes of Oskido and Professor says it is time for him to return the favour by doing the same for up-and-coming artistes in Bulawayo. The man who fronts Kwaito group, Stiff which is popular for the Umcimbi hit, has been in Bulawayo in Luveve suburb where he was raised, ever since lockdown was enforced across the Limpopo. To while up time, Diliza has been working with local artistes behind the scenes to try and uplift them. Among them are Rebellious Suhnz for whom he produced a track last year. The track titled Simanje Manje did well and saw Diliza forming a relationship with the young producers who are into house music. “This Covid-19 pandemic affected a lot of things, but I’m glad to be in studio with my boys, Rebellious Suhnz. They’re working on an EP that I’m featuring on. This is what I’m focusing on now as there’s a need to push youngsters,” said Diliza. By assisting the artistes at home with his skills and links in South Africa, Diliza said he wanted to show them that their talents can be nurtured and developed locally without them having to go through the hassle of travelling to South Africa. “I want to give them the opportunity that I didn’t have when I was young. It’s better for them as they don’t have to be like us who went down to South Africa to secure a record deal. “They can do it at home and also, they can do it through social media. I want to use the contacts that I have to give them the best shot in the industry,” he said. The artiste who was under the weather for some time last year as he had a chest infection that affected his performances, said that experience actually prepared him for the lockdown as he had gotten used to staying at home. “I got used to staying at home and making ends meet with one or two personal projects when I was not feeling well. Now I’m better and staying at home isn’t a big deal for me. I’m used to it,” said Diliza. – Follow on Twitter @bonganinkunzi