The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent 
IT’S been five years since hip-hop musician Cal_Vin released the music video for his hit-track Zikhuphani that earned him awards, fame and a collaboration with top South African rapper Cassper Nyovest. The hard-hitting song, a fusion of kwaito and hip-hop, was the rapper’s announcement to the hip-hop industry after rebranding from being a Church Boy to Cal_Vin. Zikhuphani was part of Cal_Vin’s 2014 EP titled Dat Luveve Boy. The EP also contained another hit, Bebengakholwa. The song having earned a number one spot on Power FM’s School of Hip-Hop Chart and topping ZiFM Stereo charts for three months, also saw top South Africa hip-hop artiste, Cassper Nyovest jumping onto it for a remix after he heard it on ZiFM Stereo. According to Cal_Vin, the track became the most downloaded song in Zimbabwe having over 25 000 downloads in 24 hours and over 48 000 in a week. Reminiscing about the track that shot him to stardom, Cal_Vin said it was amazing that a track he did as an experiment, got him fame thereby changing his life and career completely. “I can’t believe it’s been five years since the release of one of the best songs in the country, Zikhuphani. The song was just an experiment as I wasn’t really into kwaito/ hip-hop at the time. “I just thought let me try it out so when I released the song, it shockingly became the best song in the country as it topped the charts for three months on ZiFM Stereo,” said Cal_Vin. But with all this hype, Cal_Vin had no video for the runaway track until after a month. The recording of this video was special to Cal_Vin, not only because it was sponsored by an America-based local make-up artist, Jackie Mgido, but because of the unity that was shown by the Bulawayo arts fraternity. “At that time, the culture of the Bulawayo music industry was stronger as everyone was trying to support each other. It was at a time that the Bulawayo music industry was totally dead and there was no force, no drive, no zeal or energy. “But when I came through, I managed to mobilise people who believed that I had something to give to them,” said Cal Vin. On the video, there are familiar faces like Mbo Mahocs, Novuyo Seagirl and her twin sister Ntombiyolwandle, kwaito musician Mawiza and a whole host of other people who have gone to make it in their respective careers. “People like Mbo Mahocs, Mzoe 7, Novuyo Seagirl and Mawiza came through. All the young rappers were there. They were young then and now they are big. “It was all love. I miss those days because now you don’t find that. These days it’s about division and everyone is big-headed,” bemoaned Cal_Vin. He said he is forever grateful to Mgido for believing in him through sponsoring his video as she wanted to uplift him. “Jackie Mgido hit me up on my Instagram saying she was coming to open branches for her company, Vault Cosmetics in Zimbabwe. After a few conversations, she suggested that as she was launching in Bulawayo, she wanted someone to partner with her. And that person was me,” said Cal_Vin. “I don’t know who played my song for her, but when she heard Zikhuphani, she said she was amazed. She said although she couldn’t understand a word, there was something about the song.” And on the day the video was recorded, it rained and Cal_Vin got worried as he thought people would not come through. But to his surprise, they came in their numbers. “I thought people were not going to come out because it was raining but to my surprise everyone came out from all hoods, Pumula, Emganwini, Emakhandeni, Cowdray Park and Entumbane. “There were so many people as depicted in the music video. Besides Jackie, I have to thank everyone who made the video possible,” said Cal_Vin. — @bonganinkunzi