The Chronicle Nduduzo Tshuma, Political Editor
Government has stepped up efforts to ensure that the 15 000-hectare Bulawayo Kraal Irrigation project is finally operational after a number of false starts since its inception in 2004, to ensure that the district moves along with others in terms of development. Vice President Constantino Chiwenga last Friday visited the project accompanied by Lands, Agriculture, Water and Rural Resettlement Minister Perrance Shiri, Energy and Power Development Minister Fortune Chasi and Deputy Finance and Economic Development Minister Clemence Chiduwa and the Matabeleland North Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Richard Moyo. It was revealed during the visit that six companies have applied to partner the Arda in the project and the agency is in the process of adjudication before sending the shortlisted company to the Ministry of Agriculture before the information is relayed to President Mnangagwa for final decision. In the arrangement, Arda will represent the interest of the people while some land will also be set aside for local farmers to plant various crops. Speaking during the visit, VP Chiwenga said the ministry of Agriculture has been directed to clear the 15 000 hectares and lay the pipes carrying water from Zambezi to the scheme so that the project kicks off without delay. “We want this project to work, there is a lot of water here in the Zambezi and we are letting it flow into the Indian Ocean which is full of water. We can’t let the water just flow and not use it then we say we are hungry. “We have experienced drought year after year or at times low rainfall and got poor yields, resulting in us having to buy maize to give to the people. For how long? This virus, Covid-19, when it ends, life will not be the same all over the world,” said VP Chiwenga. “If it’s like that, where are we going to buy the food? We have the land, we redistributed it, everyone who was given land, we must come together and till that land and go back to our glory days when we sold our produce to the region. “We can achieve this when we are united and have one goal.” VP Chiwenga said the Ministries of Agriculture and Finance should make sure that the 15 000 hectares, or more if possible, is cleared so that various crops are planted in the scheme and Binga develops from the value chain. “We don’t want any part of this country to be left behind when other areas are developing, all areas must be developed. What we want to do here is what we want to do along the Zambezi like in Kanyemba. “After doing this, we want to eliminate the issue of buying food from outside as we will be self-sustaining and food secure and also be able to sell to others,” he said. “This is what we are here for, we saw centre pivots lying around, pipes must be laid. We must clear the land so that when the investor comes, they don’t say ‘you gave us a bush and if it wasn’t for us there is nothing you would have done.’ “We want to give them cleared land like a soccer pitch, the pipes coming from Zambezi having already been laid and pumping water.” VP Chiwenga said the Government will closely monitor the project until it kicks off and its benefits realised. “From now on we will be coming here regularly, you will get tired of us, to see how things are going. What is the problem? what are the impediments? We want to solve whatever issues are there so that we proceed with work,” said VP Chiwenga. He said Minister Shiri will also engage the provincial leadership to make sure that everyone moves in one direction. “We are not just bringing companies but also want to uplift the lives of the people. Minister Shiri will come and sit with you and the leadership of the province and the local leadership so that you also include your interests and what you wish for, not for the project to be imposed on you. We will also come to check if you are happy with the programme and that it is according to your expectations,” said VP Chiwenga. Minister Moyo said the Government was committed to uplifting the lives of the people of Binga through making sure that projects like the Bulawayo Kraal Irrigation Scheme are a success. He said gone are the days where equipment would lie idle without being effectively used to boost food security and create jobs in the district and province.