The Chronicle Andile Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
PEOPLE living with disabilities have called for a disability inclusive Covid-19 response to ensure they are not exposed to the pandemic. They said inclusive and comprehensive Covid-19 education and programming was needed in the country to ensure that no one was left behind in the fight against the virus. President Mnangagwa’s special advisor on Disability Issues Cde Joshua Malinga, while addressing people living with disabilities at Davies Hall in Bulawayo on Thursday said it was important for people with disabilities to be included in all aspects of crisis communication and disaster management. “As people with disabilities, we are one of the most vulnerable when disasters strike. Right now, we have a deadly virus that is raging and countries are on lockdown. As people stay at home, incomes are eroded and some of our community members are not formally employed so they have lost their source of livelihoods,” said Cde Malinga. He said policy makers must craft Covid-19 response strategies that do not treat the disabled community as a homogenous group but is sensitive to their various differences and needs. “Government and other policy makers must realise that people living with disabilities are not a homogeneous group, but we are different and have different needs. “Efforts must therefore be made to ensure that all Covid-19 educational information, among other things is packaged in such a way that it is relevant for all of us,” he said. Cde Malinga said the Covid-19 pandemic and lockdown had adversely affected the disabled community as most of them were informally employed and were struggling with rentals, food and other basic necessities. “This has been a particularly trying time for us. Shorter operating hours for shops mean longer queues and some people have not been sensitive enough to realise our plight and grant us entry. We also have rentals to pay, families to feed so as efforts are made to ensure that we are taken care of, these are some of the needs that must be considered,” he said. He urged people with disabilities to be active in public life to ensure they are involved in policy making so that decisions are not made on their behalf by other people. “As special advisor to the President on disability, I ensure that our plight is heard and that ideas get to the leaders. However, I want the disabled community to know that implementation is someone else’s responsibility. I call upon the disabled community to be more active and more visible so that they also speak for themselves and we are heard. “They must join politics so that in decision making they are included, politics affects our day to day life, staying away from it does not benefit us,” said Cde Malinga. — @andile_tshuma