The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
HIGHLANDERS’ pint-sized winger Ray “Ndorindori” Lunga says he misses terrorising opponents at Barbourfields Stadium as football remains suspended due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The Castle Lager Premier Soccer League would have been entering its sixth week had it not been for the pandemic that forced governments around the globe to take life-saving decisions by enforcing restrictions on public gatherings. Zimbabwe is on a national lockdown which started on March 30. Lunga, son to Highlanders legend and former hitman Gift, took to Twitter to express his “frustration” at being ineffective. “I was impatiently waiting for the kick-off whistle so that I could fly down the right channel. #BFmemories. I miss football. I miss the BF atmosphere. I miss the super supporters,” wrote Lunga, who made his first team debut away to Shabanie Mine in 2017. During that match, he terrorised the home team and capped a fine afternoon with an assist that was buried by Ralph Matema. With some luck Lunga could have registered his name on the scoresheet. After the match then Bosso coach Erol Akbay ran onto the pitch and lifted the pint-sized player into the air. Thereafter, Lunga played a number of cameo roles as a substitute in most of the games. Last season he however, saw little action under another Dutchman Pieter de Jongh, who left for league champions FC Platinum. Meanwhile, it still remains unclear when fans will get to enjoy football this season. This week a Ministry of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation official insinuated that local sporting competitions might not start until August. The official said it was necessary to take all necessary measures to combat the Covid-19 pandemic first. He said while others may be persuaded to also think in terms of losses that sport and other industries have endured, it must be understood that profit in any entity is as a result of human effort and if their safety is compromised, no profit will be realised.