The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
RELAXATION of the Covid-19 lockdown restrictions has seen an increase of people on the streets, with fitness fanatics joined by those that had been stuck in their homes. With gyms still closed as part of efforts to contain the spread of coronavirus, most people that practice healthy lifestyles seem to be abandoning the “train at home” exercises, preferring to go out for jogs. A Chronicle Sport crew yesterday morning drove around some Bulawayo western suburbs and witnessed groups of joggers doing road runs. From the intersection of Luveve Road and Ntemba Road in Magwegwe North, through Magwegwe West, the Pumula East roundabout to the intersection of Ntemba Road and Khami Road in Nkulumane 12, groups of school-going children and adults were jogging in groups. Some were running in groups of about as 10. Donnel Chiweshe, a player for Toronto FC, who were relegated from the Zifa Southern Region Division One League, said the volume of people on the road had forced his group to alter their timetable. “The last two days have seen an increase in people joining us for a jog. As you can see now it’s about 6.30am and it’s as if there’s a race. In the past weeks, there were a few people and you rarely met many people, but since the relaxation of the lockdown, we are meeting new faces and it’s as if people just want to be out,” said Chiweshe. A middle-aged woman in the company of a couple of secondary school runners said: “I’m a member of a gym in the city and since they are closed, I’m just trying to keep fit. I’ve been working out at home, but I missed going out for road runs. I’ll be doing these 10km runs twice a week and will be on this road again on Thursday.” In Siye Phambili Drive, joggers evaded the police roadblock at Nkulumane Complex. A big number of joggers was also seen along Plumtree Road, with some going as far as Mbokodo Abattoir, at the 13km peg. Health experts have called for the public to remain cautious about their health despite the relaxation of some restrictions. Zimbabwe Medical Association (ZIMA) secretary-general Dr Sacrifice Chirisa was quoted saying members of the public with no business in public spaces must still remain at home for the good of their health and that of the general public. He called for the correct use of masks and said people must not reuse disposable masks, while reusable masks must be washed and ironed before use. Bulawayo Athletics Board (Bab) chairman Manuel Mpofu encouraged people to practice social distancing and train at home. “We encourage safe running and participation in sanctioned races. We are also encouraging people to be responsible in the manner that they train. They should adhere to government advice because Covid-19 is real. “People must try to stick to the training exercises that have been circulating on WhatsApp platforms, which can be done at home. Please, stay at home and be safe,” said Mpofu. — @ZililoR.