The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) has entered into an exploratory partnership with the Global Esports Federation (GEF), whose objective is to develop a Commonwealth esports strategy aligned to the Commonwealth Strategic Plan, Transformation 2022. Veteran sports administrator and Zimpapers chairman Tommy Sithole and Tyrone Seward are members of the GEF’s eight commissions. Sithole chairs the Governance and Ethics Commission of the GEF while Seward, husband to Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation Minister Kirsty Coventry, deputises Chester King in the Education, Culture and Wellness Commission. According to a recent communiqué, the partnership will focus on conducting an analysis of the status of esports in the Commonwealth and its capacity to support and advance the two bodies’ vision and mission through a joint development of a value-based Commonwealth esports strategy. The partnership will also explore and develop athlete-centred, sport-focused initiatives and campaigns that harness and elevate the principles of equality, diversity, inclusion, intergrity, and innovation in esports across the Commonwealth bloc while also exploring the development of sustainable esports properties that could benefit the parties through promotional opportunities that connect and serve athletes, citizens and communities. “In recent years we have seen the dramatic rise of esports in terms of popularity and participation, particularly of young people. During the Covid-19 pandemic, interest in esports globally has increased significantly, which demonstrates an important characteristic of connecting people during this difficult period. “For some time now, the CGF has been looking for a formal way to engage with esports, to explore how it can align with the Commonwealth Sports Movement and its support of the sustainable development of digital infrastructure, connectivity and commerce across the Commonwealth. “In the Global Esports Federation, we know we have the right partner to help us undertake this exciting piece of work,” said CGF president Dame Louse Martin in the statement. His GEF counterpart Chris Chan said the partnership will strengthen the Federation’s mission of convening the world’s esports ecosystem. “The GEF board looks forward to working with the entire Commonwealth Sports Movement. We congratulate the CGF for the work they do every day, developing sports across the 71 Commonwealth nations, territories and beyond. “This partnership allows us to develop a pathway together for an inclusive, progressive and visionary future for the youth and entire Commonwealth, reaching across a third of the world’s population. The future of esports continues to be bright,” said Chan.