The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Fast growing media company, Fusion Media Group (FMG) from Bulawayo will be promoting the city’s artistes through a virtual show tonight. Dubbed the Lockdown party, the show, for its second edition, will feature performances from Samuzik — composer of Ngoma Ingoma’s award-winning song Amalobolo, Kyla Blac, Nate, DJ Nospa and DJ Crazy Black. The event taking place at the FMG studio will be shown on the FMG Facebook page from 8PM. The inaugural show last Monday saw FMG founder Tatenda “MK” Mnkandla partnering with Ngoma Ingoma bass guitarist Blessing Stot to give people live entertainment from Melanin Rush, Nate and DJ Nospa. MK said they came up with this initiative to promote the city’s talent while providing people with quality entertainment during the lockdown. “After realising that the lockdown would be extended, we hosted a show with ZimWeddings with the idea of promoting local DJs. We then followed up on the idea and held our first lockdown session party last week. “We then decided to have our sessions on Mondays because people on this day are usually free,” said MK. He said through staging these shows, they also want to ensure that artistes have a source of income during the lockdown. Recently, artistes from the city expressed willingness to host virtual shows but said they were incapacitated as they do not have the resources to do so. MK therefore urged the corporate world to jump on board and support the city’s talent. “The idea is to grow the audience online and then partner with corporates for sponsorship. “Usually, artistes want to be sponsored, but their brands won’t have value addition to the corporates business. “So with the virtual shows, we are trying to push content and have a huge fan base so that the deal also benefits corporates that will come on board.” MK said they are already working on the third show and a massive online gig for the Africa Day celebrations on May 25. “For the third session, we’ll have Lee McHoney, Mimmie, Asaph, Skaiva, DJ Nospa and Nate. We are also planning a massive Africa Day celebration online and we are hoping to get Ngoma iNgoma, Nobuntu and Djembe Monks among other artistes,” said MK. He urged the city’s artistes to unite and work together to create content. “Artistes need to unite and create content as no one will just bring money to them. They need to show their determination to work and help promote corporates products and services,” said MK. — @mthabisi_mthire.