The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Chronicle reporter
ZIMPAPERS is launching a fundraising campaign to mobilise resources towards the national response to Covid-19 using its media platforms. The country’s biggest integrated media group will launch the fundraising campaign on Sunday under the tagline: #TogetherWeStandTogetherWeWin and is targeting to raise resources in cash and kind. Zimpapers chief executive officer Mr Pikirai Deketeke invited members of the public to donate to the worthy cause. “With this campaign, we are inviting Zimbabweans to come together to contribute to the national Covid-19 response. There are not enough test kits and Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) for those who need them. There are also heartbreaking personal stories of people who are struggling to put food on the table; which our reporters are highlighting daily through our platforms,” said Mr Deketeke. He said the onset of the winter season will expose many to harsh weather conditions, hence the need to support them. “With winter fully upon us now; our hearts go out to those thousands who do not have enough warm clothing or blankets. Colds and coughs are very common in this season and we anticipate that there will be rising needs for flu medicines, vitamins and related essentials. With us coming together to contribute what we can; we will make a difference in someone’s life”, said Mr Deketeke. The campaign will see all the Group’s platforms- print, digital, television and radio mobilising audiences across the country and globe to lend a hand to the Covid-19 response. Mr Deketeke says the effects of Covid-19 would be felt by generations to come; adding that the pandemic has affected communities in many ways with some losing loved ones and others losing livelihoods while others find themselves living with daily risk due to the work they do. “None of us can go it alone. As a business we are going to channel some resources to the cause. We are also donating space and airtime daily to Covid-19 educative material as our way of keeping all our stakeholders informed. We invite you to join us in this cause to keep our people safe and alive.” he said. Zimpapers has in the past run similar campaigns to support communities that would have been affected by disasters. like Cyclone Idai floods which hit Manicaland and the Tsholotsho floods. Mr Deketeke says a separate bank account and merchant code has been created for the campaign. “All Zimpapers offices across Zimbabwe will serve as collection points where the public can drop their donations and all donations will be accounted for,” he said. — @themkhust_ncube