The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
RECENTLY, some artistes from Bulawayo who have been affected by the Covid-19 pandemic due to loss of business, were given bags of mealie- meal to assist them during this trying time. But, what made this gesture special was that the donation was made by one of “their own”, a UK-based Maskandi artiste by the name Sisa Senkosi (real name Sisasenkosi Mkandla) through her Isisa Senkosi Helping Hands Foundation. Interestingly, as they received the donation, some artistes, most who were young, seemed not to know much about this donor who had come to their relief. So Saturday Leisure tracked down Sisa Senkosi who left the country for the UK in 2007, to find out more about her. Raised in the dusty streets of Magwegwe, Sisasenkosi who was born on Africa Day 36 years ago, resembles exactly what her name means. She is a person filled with the Lord’s mercy. In the arts sector, she is not a new face as she leaned towards the arts at a tender age through joining the drama club at Magwegwe Primary School and pursuing her passion at St Bernard’s and Townsend high schools. It didn’t take her long before she found a home at Grassroots Theatre Company where she cut her teeth in the arts and with dancing being her strongest area, it was inevitable that she would play leading roles in dance productions. She was to later join Siyaya Arts before leaving for the United Kingdom in 2007. There, she did arts as a freelance while working at a restaurant. Her love for Siyaya saw her continue working with the group whenever they embarked on tours in the UK. She later grouped with other UK-based Zimbabwean artistes that included former Iyasa members Tsungi Tsikirai, Muz’omkhulu Ndlovu, Owen Ncube, Nixon Nkomo and Botswana artiste Otto Gumaelius to form a group they named Flame Lily Arts. In 2016, she released her debut album titled Thandolwethu which she recorded in neighbouring South Africa where she collaborated with Maskandi artistes from South Africa and Zimbabwe. The same year, she released Amahlolanyama, a tribute to Highlanders F.C, one of Bulawayo’s oldest football clubs. “The song coincided with their 90th anniversary and I composed it because since 1926, they have been a source of pride in Matabeleland,” she said. In 2017 she performed alongside Dalom Kids and Dan Tshanda in Leeds in the UK as well as the Miss World UK Zimbabwe alongside Cynthia Mare and Tytan. Having interacted with so many diverse people in her career, Sisa Senkosi said she believes working with up-and-coming and renowned artistes is the best way to rise up the ladder. “In 2019, I released a single titled Ngiyavuma on which I collaborated with Soul Brothers’ Moses Ngwenya and Platform One. The song is more of a wedding tune as it is about welcoming a bride to her new family.” Her next album, the musician said is expected to be ready next year. “It should have been ready this year, but Covid-19 affected it as I’d partly recorded some tracks in South Africa and can’t complete them as I can’t travel,” said Sisa Senkosi. One of her dreams is to share the stage with music greats as well as to popularise her Zimbabwean heritage and culture to the world. “I believe that a culture is in its language which is why I want to go onto world stages and showcase ubuntu/hunhu. Also, this is why I regard myself as imbokodo (cornerstone),” said Sisa Senkosi. But, most important to her have been those who have supported her journey in the arts as well as the need to give back to community. So, when she is not in the studio or dancing, Sisa Senkosi is up and about doing charity work. Her helping hand was seen locally when she donated over 60 bags of mealie-meal to artistes in Bulawayo. In 2017, she donated to Tsholotsho flood victims. “I’m not only a singer and dancer. I’m also very passionate about charity work. I once assisted the Tsholotsho flood victims where I donated part of proceeds from my CD sales proceeds to the schoolchildren through stationery. “At present, I’m involved in a lot of philanthropic work that is centred on orphanages, women and the girl child. My trust recently donated to two orphanages in Bulawayo (Emthunzini weThemba and Mustard Seed) which look after orphans with physical disabilities. We have also donated to artistes and football teams,” she said. Her next port of call is the local education fraternity which she feels should be highly prioritised. “I believe in education and therefore would love to be involved in the education system in Zimbabwe.” — @mthabisi_mthire.