The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
DISTRIBUTION of basic commodities sourced by Highlanders supporters to cushion the players has been postponed by a week to give fans more time to contribute. Bosso players are among a host of athletes that have been hit hard by the indefinite suspension of sporting activities nationwide due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The players rely on winning bonuses but the start of the league has been postponed indefinitely due to the pandemic. Highlanders players and their technical team are yet to receive their April salaries while the club’s sponsorship deal with NetOne is reportedly hanging by a thread as the mobile network operator is believed to have pulled the plug on football sponsorship due to the economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic. NetOne has also been sponsoring Caps United and army side Black Rhinos. Musician Thulani “Harsh-Touch” Dube, who has composed a number of Highlanders’ songs and is spearheading the campaign to get basic commodities for the players, said the fans’ response had been “overwhelming”. “The process of raising funds to get the players food hampers that will include basic commodities such as mealie-meal, sugar and cooking oil, among other items, has been going on well and some fans have asked for at least a week to make their contributions. After news broke out that players haven’t received their April salaries, most Highlanders’ fans were touched and made pledges to contribute something this week. “We understand the situation that the players are going through and also appreciate that even Highlanders’ members are faced with difficulties because of the Covid-19 lockdown. What we’ve done through the various supporters’ WhatsApp groups is to ask them to donate to the cause. Those that want to donate in kind must get in touch and to tell us where to pick up their contributions,” said Dube. He said EcoCash contributions can be sent to Highlanders life-card carrying member Khetha Marizane. And every transaction will be published in their WhatsApp groups. — @ZililoR