The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent 
VICE-PRESIDENT Kembo Mohadi has said compliance to measures put in place by Government to curb the spread of Covid-19 is the only salvation for the country as it does not have resources to contain a major outbreak. Speaking recently during a visit to the Gwanda Provincial Hospital to monitor progress in terms of work done in fighting the pandemic, VP Mohadi who is also the chairperson of the Ad-Hoc inter-Ministerial Committee on Covid-19, said while the lockdown was at level two and some restrictions had been relaxed, people have to adhere to regulations. VP Mohadi said Government and citizens all have a role to play to stop the spread of the virus. He said while rules have been relaxed that doesn’t mean that people have to be reckless. VP Mohadi said all citizens are expected to behave in a manner that will not compromise the health of the country. “The fear we have is that if we have a mass local infection, we might have a problem in tracing its source. It will spread within a short space of time and get out of hand. We don’t have resources as a country. First world countries like China have all the necessary resources but this pandemic severely affected them and it took quite a toll on them despite the resources they have. “Americans have a multi trillion-dollar economy but they lost more than 60 000 people and more than a million of them have been infected,” he said. “Same as Italy which has good resources in the health sector but still, they could not prevent the pandemic and what more of ourselves that are not endowed with those kind of resources and health facilities that the first world has. We don’t have resources and we are under sanctions. If it happens to befall us what will we do, does it mean the end of Zimbabwe?” VP Mohadi said the country’s only salvation is prevention and compliance in order to keep the pandemic at bay. “ I implore you to take ownership of your life and don’t wait for law enforcement agents to compel you to adhere to the regulations,” he said. VP Mohadi said there were challenges of compliance with lockdown regulations and Government through law enforcement agents will continue to enforce the measures. He said various stakeholders had disseminated information on Covid-19 even up to remote parts of the country and it was up to the people to take heed of these messages. The VP also urged people to put aside their political differences and work together. “The fight against Covid-19 is not only for Government but every individual in the country. Let’s confine it as it is, let’s work on recoveries and let’s work on minimising infections through behaviour change and abiding by regulations. “We know the lockdown isn’t pleasant but it’s an effective way to contain the pandemic,” he said. — @DubeMatutu.