The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
EXPERIENCED football administrator Kennedy Ndebele has challenged the sports industry to take a leaf from the creative arts sector, which has managed to charm the Government and is in line to benefit from the Covid-19 stimulus package. Announcing a two-week lockdown extension at the weekend, President Mnangagwa said he had instructed Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation Minister Kirsty Coventry to make a proposal to the Government on how best the creative arts sector can be helped after being affected by Covid-19. President Mnangagwa said the sector needs to be assisted to mitigate the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic. Ndebele applauded strides the creative arts industry has made over the years, noting that attitude problems within the sports industry have led to the Government losing confidence in some sporting institutions. “The creative arts industry has been developing slowly over the years. Now they have got the ear and won the heart of the highest office in the land. Sport is facing a myriad of challenges but has this ‘touch me not’ attitude banking on the protection of international sports federations. It’s time sports organisations take a leaf from creative artists, who have toiled over the years but are now shining Zimbabwe ambassadors all over the World,” wrote Ndebele on his Facebook timeline. Ndebele, who was expressing his personal views could stoke flames within the sports sector for his post. Organisations like Zifa and Zimbabwe Cricket are some of the institutions that have in the past clashed with the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC) over non-compliance matters. Whenever the Government tries to intervene following concerns of governance deficiencies, they are quick to run to their international federations, alleging interference. Coventry, whose Ministry was last week given a $17 million relief fund for youth-led businesses, is on record saying they will not be arm-twisted to fund associations that are quick to request Government assistance but when asked to account, they hide behind international federations. The sports industry has been hard-hit by Covid-19 and most are waiting for bailouts from their international federations. — @ZililoR.