The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Health Reporter
GOVERNMENT has gazetted the list of companies authorised to supply Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) in a bid to weed out briefcase companies that are tendering to provide the equipment. The listed companies will supply PPE which include face masks, hand sanitisers, spraying chemicals, disposable face shields and latex gloves needed to fight the spread of Covid-19. Satewave Technologies, William Scott & Company, Silksilver Healthcare, Amet, DMD Healthcare, Henan Ail end, Continental Hardware are among the companies listed in General Notice 862 of 2020. All Seas Pharmaceuticals, Pendulum Pharmaceuticals, Kusi Chemicals, PCD Option 2, Brand Master and William Scott and Co are also part of the shortlisted companies for hand sanitizers. In the notice, Government said SITAZ, Elite Holdings, DMD Healthcare, Gesa Medicals, Silksilver Healthcare, Brand Masters and Sucrod Trading had been identified to supply disposable gowns. “NatPharm (the National Pharmaceutical Company) herein referred to as the ‘Procuring Entity operating under instructions from the Ministry of Health and Child Care’ in line with the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act [Chapter 22:23], would like to notify the public of the updated shortlist of eligible Suppliers of Detergents, Medical and Surgical Sundries under Framework Agreement,” read General Notice 862 of 2020. NatPharm is responsible for logistics and distribution of the PPE. According to the notice, new suppliers who are interested to be added should contact the NatPharm Procurement Management Unit (PMU) by sending an email to procurement@natpharm.co.zw. Last week Cabinet raised concern over the mushrooming of briefcase companies which are being involved in the tendering process for Covid-19 supplies. “Government will leave no stone unturned in ensuring that such unscrupulous business elements are sifted out,” said Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa. She said Cabinet also reaffirmed the need to continuously improve the conditions of service in the health sector to minimise exposure to Covid-19. Government has also said it is investigating the possible theft of PPE for frontline workers in the health sector which is not reaching the intended beneficiaries after being released from NatPharm. The Ministry of Health and Child Care says despite distributing PPE to various stations, health workers are still complaining that they are not receiving the critical clothing. — @thamamoe