The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter
THE Zimbabwe Media Commission (ZMC) will next week start accrediting journalists and has introduced four new accreditation categories. In a letter addressed to the police, ZMC said the new categories will see journalists using different cards depending on which form of media they work for. Journalists have been using 2019 press cards which has landed some of them in trouble especially during the Covid-19 lockdown. The commission also highlighted that in carrying out the accreditation process, World Health Organisation guidelines will be taken into account. “This letter serves to inform the Zimbabwe Republic Police (ZRP) that the Commission plans to start accrediting journalists and other media practitioners on 26 May 2020. The Commission is currently putting in place all necessary logistical arrangements taking into account World Health Organisation (WHO) and Ministry of Health and Child Welfare guidelines on Covid-19,” read the letter. Only two types of accreditation cards, one for local journalists and the other for foreign had been issued in the past years. This time, there will six; journalists working for mainstream media registered or licensed by the ZMC and the Broadcasting Authority of Zimbabwe (BAZ), foreign media personnel cleared by the Government through the Ministry of Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services, online media practitioners running online news channels; content producers who produce various media products for online distribution, photographers and media practitioners in the film sector. “This new categorisation of media practitioners for accreditation purposes is meant to deal with abuse of the accreditation process where everyone in possession of an accreditation card would present himself or herself as a duly accredited reporter for the purpose of accessing certain events and functions. The abuse of the accreditation card was putting the name of the profession and the ZMC into disrepute,” read the letter. — @thamamoe