The Chronicle Chronicle Reporters
WORKERS who are grounded at home due to the Covid-19 induced lockdown have an opportunity to innovate and improve themselves to remain relevant in their fields as experts predict that tech savvy individuals will have an edge after the global pandemic. Today the country joins the rest of the world to commemorate Workers Day at a time when most employees are feeling the pinch of Covid-19. While some workers are working from home, others have been sent on forced leave and some have even lost their jobs as the world grapples with the Covid-19 impact on economies. Industry experts have said all is not gloomy as workers have been given a chance to upgrade themselves away from industry pressure where they would have struggled to grasp new concepts that are a must in the future. Already, Government is working on a stimulus package to support some sectors that have seriously been affected by the lockdown. Labour expert Mr Davies Ndumiso Sibanda said workers who are stuck at home should reinvent themselves during lockdown to be relevant to industries after Covid-19. “The worst mistake many workers are making is to sit at home and wait for the lockdown to come to an end and go back to jobs and companies, which might no longer be there. A smart worker should have foresight and retool for the future,” said Mr Sibanda. “The world is moving towards digital age skills and it is these skills that are now critical after Covid-19. Workers should be on their phones, laptops, tablets and desktops teaching themselves programmes that talk to their areas of expertise or learning new skills that will help them survive. “For example, the ability to handle conferencing applications is now a must for everyone who attends meetings, as meetings will not be attended physically in many instances.” Mrs Thokozile Dlodlo, a local businesswoman, said workers should grab the chance to be part of the future. “Most people were becoming irrelevant at work and they did not have the time to learn new technologies. Covid-19 has presented a glorious opportunity for people to research and equip themselves to be part of the future. They can do this leisurely at home instead of at work where tight deadlines might have made it impossible,” said Mrs Dlodlo. Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Union president Mr Peter Mutasa said the workers’ body will deliver an online Workers Day message through online platforms today to commemorate the day. He said workers, industry and Government should come up with social contracts to protect employees from the severe impact of lockdown and Covid-19 that has led to job losses. Mr Mutasa said most workers were facing uncertainty following the disruptions Covid-19 caused and need to be assisted. Association of Business in Zimbabwe chief executive officer Mr Victor Nyoni, said today’s commemorations should give both industry and workers time to reflect on their standing. He said job losses were inevitable as industries were also feeling the negative impact of Covid-19. “In short, the landscape is not favourable to employees. The tourism sector is unlikely to recover in the year 2020, therefore most employees will lose jobs in this sector. I have been hearing companies contemplating outsourcing some services as they have discovered that they do not need those services on a full time basis,” he said. Economic analyst Mr Morris Mpala said businesses have started losing revenue due to Covid-19 caused lockdown. He said the period calls for innovation among companies and employees to remain relevant to this digital age in view of the global pandemic. Mr Mpala said to save jobs and some industries, there is a need for a holistic package. “It’s time for a stimulus package in holistic manner not to encourage business but to encourage spending which will increase demand for goods and products thus preserve jobs. Innovated minds are still required. Corporate Tax reductions, increase tax free threshold, reduce levies, fuel reduction, cheaper funds to business in the hope prices and services will be produced at affordable levels,” said Mr Mpala.