The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
There is a musician people need to watch out for as he has a lot of potential to take the country’s music to another level with his soothing sound. This is Samuzik (real name Samuel Siwela), the guy who composed and sang Amalobolo, a love song that clinched a Skyz Metro FM award last year for song of the year. A very humble person, Samuzik who does not limit himself to one genre, is also a talented guitarist. He started doing music professionally in 2010 with Outfit Band and he is now with Ngoma Ingoma, a fast-rising group which popularised the Amalobolo hit. This song, within months of release last year, saw Ngoma Ingoma becoming a strong force in the music industry as they were invited to perform at several significant events, the biggest locally being the Victoria Falls Carnival in December. Thereafter, they were invited to perform at the Zimbabwe Music Awards as the house band. On Monday, Samuzik, backed by Ngoma Ingoma band members, performed at the Fusion Media Group (FMG) lockdown party that was streamed on the FMG Facebook page. Watching his performance, most were amazed by his talent. Fans say he is definitely destined for greater heights. To show that he is not a one-hit-wonder, Samuzik recently released another love song titled Ngisemathandweni which is promising to be a hit, if the reviews it got during the live stream are anything to go by. The song is off his EP titled The Song Book of Love. Commenting on his latest track, Samuzik who has one album – Tears of the Sun, said Ngisemathandweni is a soft, melodious song that was recorded at P3 Studio and H-West Studios in Bulawayo. He said the song is meant to increase the viability of his collage of love singles as he readies to drop his second offering. “Generally, it’s a love song where the guy expresses his love for his lover. It’s more about encouraging lovers to focus on one goal in a relationship and shy away from listening to a third party,” he said. The lockdown, the musician said, has given him ample time to focus on his forthcoming EP which he started working on two years ago. “The song was recorded on February 10 just before Valentine’s Day but due to a busy schedule, I’ve been working on it bit by bit. Now that I’m always at home because of the lockdown, I’ve time to focus on my project – The Song Book of Love – an EP which I am planning to release before the end of the year,” said Samuzik. Ngisemathandweni is one of three singles that have been released thus far from the EP which is expected to have eight songs. Reflecting on the success of Amalobolo, Samuzik said he did not think the song would blow up the way it did. Samuzik believes love, which is his main focus in his songs, is an important aspect in the society that should drive most livelihoods in light of this pandemic.– @mthabisi_mthire.