The Chronicle THE Bundesliga will resume behind closed doors on Saturday May 16— and is the first European league to restart following the coronavirus shutdown. One of the games on the day of relaunch will be the derby between Schalke and Borussia Dortmund. Champions Bayern Munich, who are four points clear at the top of the table, travel to Union Berlin on Sunday. Most teams have nine games to play, with the final weekend of the season rescheduled for 27-28 June. The German Football Association (DFL) said the season would resume under strict health protocols that ban fans from the stadium and require players to have Covid-19 testing. Around 300 people, including players, staff and officials, will be in or around the stadiums during match days. The league has been suspended since 13 March; clubs returned to training in mid-April with players working out in groups. Christian Seifert, chief executive of the German Football League (DFL), held a news conference yesterday where he said despite the empty stands and other restrictions, “it was crucial to resume play”. Other updates to emerge included: As well as players and coaching staff, referees will also be subject to medical and hygiene regulations. There was no clarification on the issue of matches being available free to air in Germany – talks are under way with broadcasters. There were 10 positive results from clubs in the top two divisions following the first series of coronavirus tests — and two in the second series. On Wednesday, Chancellor Angela Merkel eased some restrictions, allowing shops to reopen with the country seeing fewer than 7 000 deaths from coronavirus. Seifert said: “The matches will feel different. After the first matchday, we will all know why we prefer games with fans. But that is the framework we have to operate in and I expect the best possible sport within this framework.” Meanwhile, the executive committee of the World Players Association – which represents 85 000 players and athletes across world sport – will meet next week to discuss medical protocols around the return to sport. It said in a statement: “All proposals need to be calmly and rigorously assessed by relevant experts with a clear commitment that player health and safety is not negotiable.” — BBC Sport