The Chronicle CRICKET Australia has announced a full international schedule for the 2020-21 summer, underlining the organisation’s growing confidence the season will be able to proceed amid loosening Covid-19 restrictions. The full schedule includes international cricket in every month from August to February, with CA chief executive Kevin Roberts adding it is subject to change amid the uncertainty of the coronavirus pandemic. “While acknowledging the difficulty in navigating a global pandemic, we are nonetheless encouraged by the progress Australia is making in combating the coronavirus and the positive impact that is having on our ability to host an exciting summer of cricket in 2020-21,” Roberts said in a statement. “We know that circumstances or events beyond our control could mean that the final schedule potentially may look different to the one released today, but we’ll be doing everything we can to get as much international cricket in as possible this summer. “We will communicate any changes to the schedule if or when they are required.” The men’s schedule announced today confirms details of Tests against India and Afghanistan as well as revealing ODIs against India, New Zealand and Zimbabwe as well as T20 Internationals against India, New Zealand and the West Indies. Australia’s World Cup-winning women’s side are scheduled to play T20s against the New Zealand as well as ODIs against both India and the White Ferns as they look ahead to the one-day World Cup across the Tasman early next year. “We are working closely with the BCCI to deliver the eagerly anticipated men’s and women’s tours, and we are looking forward to staging the important series against both the men’s and women’s New Zealand sides,” Roberts said. “These are in addition to the scheduled men’s Test against Afghanistan and a T20 series against West Indies.” The International Cricket Council was set to meet last night to discuss the fate of the men’s T20 World Cup that is scheduled for October and November, while the crown jewel of Australia’s summer is undoubtedly the four-Test series against Virat Kohli’s Indian side, which Roberts last week rated “a nine out of 10” chance of going ahead. Australia are scheduled to begin their bid to reclaim the Border-Gavaskar trophy at their Gabba fortress, with the Brisbane ground edging out Western Australia for the coveted fixture. Gillette Men’s ODI Series v Zimbabwe
First ODI: August 9, TBC
Second ODI: August 12, TBC
Third ODI: August 15, Riverway Stadium, Townsville. — Cricket.com.au.