The Chronicle Business Reporter
VAYA Express, through VAYA Express Medical Deliveries, has pledged to offer free delivery of medical supplies to assist Zimbabweans in need of critical medicines and drugs during the restrictions imposed due the Covid-19 pandemic and beyond. VAYA Express Medical Deliveries is collaborating with Maisha Health fund (formerly Steward Health) to help people in need to reach pharmacies by managing the last mile delivery of their medicines. Announcing the free service, VAYA Logistics chief executive officer, Mr Lovemore Nyatsine, said the service will be immediately available from different pharmacies and doctors, starting with those in Harare and Bulawayo. “The free deliveries of medicines and drugs is starting right away in Harare and Bulawayo. Gweru, Mutare and Masvingo will come on stream in the next two weeks,” Mr Nyatsine said, adding that the free delivery promotion would run for three months, until July 31, 2020. He said the nation-wide Covid-19 lockdown across the country, while necessary in arresting the spread of the disease, had restricted mobility throughout the nation, making it difficult for patients, particularly the elderly and those with chronic conditions, to access medical supplies. Because Vaya Express was designated an essential service provider, Mr Nyatsine said the company was using the opportunity to offer free medical deliveries to the public. “VAYA Express Medical Deliveries will deliver medicines to the public for free during these challenging times. “The team delivering the medical supplies is trained on the necessary health protocols and will also educate recipient patients on Covid-19 preventive health protocols,” Mr Nyatsine said. He said the service was accessible through prescriptions sent via to Sasai or Whatsapp platforms of VAYA Express Medical Deliveries partner pharmacies. Mr Nyatsine said the service was especially designed for the elderly, for people with chronic conditions and for those who may not be able to travel into town to collect their medication. He added that the service was open to any doctors and pharmacies in need of delivering medicines to their home-based patients.