The Chronicle Andile Tshuma, Chronicle Reporter
MORE than 19 000 people have been arrested countrywide for defying lockdown regulations since the promulgation of the Covid-19-induced national lockdown on March 30. According to the police, 19 317 people were arrested as at yesterday afternoon, with Bulawayo still topping the list in lockdown arrests, followed by Manicaland Province and Harare. National police spokesperson Assistant Commissioner Paul Nyathi yesterday said police had made enough preparations and were ready to ensure that lockdown regulations under level two were followed. “Police and other security services we are working with are ready to ensure that lockdown measures are followed in this second leg as industry and commerce are opening. We will serve the public to ensure that all lockdown regulations are duly followed,” he said. Asst Comm Nyathi called on the transport sector to abide by the standing rules and orders of Level Two of the lockdown, which only allows public buses to operate as public service vehicles. “People will travel within cities however intercity travel remains prohibited. We remind people that for public service vehicles, only Zupco buses will be transporting the public. We are aware that some kombis are now operating at night and we strongly warn those that are doing so that they will be arrested. We want to also warn haulage truck drivers who are abusing their positions and pirating as public service vehicles. They must know that they are breaking the law, and more so, are exposing themselves and the passengers they illegally carry to the risk of contracting Covid-19,” he said. He called for members of the public to follow the new rules and recommendations in level two of the lockdown, especially on putting on masks when in public spaces to help reduce the risk of contracting or spreading Covid-19. Asst Comm Nyathi said people without masks will not be allowed in public spaces. “May we also remind the public that, as said by President Mnangagwa, they will be expected to wear face masks all the time when they are in public and those who fail to do will have to deal with law enforcement agents,” said Asst Comm Nyathi. He said people who had to take special medication or have special conditions must liaise with their local police stations wherever possible to get assistance in putting in place modalities for their travel. He added that further information and clarity on mobility during level two of the lockdown will be provided today after they receive clarity on the re-opening of industry and on the scrapping of exemption letters.-@andile_tshuma