The Chronicle Chronicle Reporter
THE National Taskforce on Covid-19 will today meet industry and commerce to work out the implementation modalities of the testing regime in line with the regulations of level two of the national lockdown. In a media briefing after the meeting of the national taskforce in Harare yesterday, Minister of Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Monica Mutsvangwa said those who are now allowed to resume operations are businesses in the formal commercial and industrial sector. She said those recognised as formal are businesses that hold a shop or other licence from a local authority and operate the business in question from a specified premise and are leasees of premises governed by the Commercial Premises (Lease Control) Act. Minister Mutsvangwa said the organisations need to be registered operators for the purpose of the Value Added Tax Act, registered as an employer for the purpose of paying employees’ tax under the Income Tax Act and are parties to a collective bargaining agreement negotiated through an Employment Council governing the business in question. “If any question arises as to whether a business in the commercial and industrial sector is formal or not, the person purporting that the business or industry is formal shall have the burden of proving to the satisfaction of a health officer that the business is formal,” said Minister Mutsvangwa. She said, as announced by President Mnangagwa, the re-opening of industry and commerce is premised on mandatory testing of employers and employees. Minister Mutsvangwa said companies are encouraged to procure Covid-19 rapid test kits for themselves, guided by the Ministry of Health and Child Care in terms of test kits specification. “The recommended Covid-19 rapid tests kits as approved by the Ministry of Health and Child Care. Employers must arrange with designated testing facilities (public and private) for their employees to be tested at an agreed time at the facilities or at the workplace,” she said. “For small organisations, the employees will go to the health facilities or designated testing centres for their testing. For larger organisations, arrangements will have to be made for testing to be conducted at the business premises by health officials from the testing institution to avoid congestion at designated testing facilities.” Minister Mutsvangwa said companies should ensure adequate space and conditions for testing, social distancing, infection prevention and control, hygiene, and privacy. The list of designated medical facilities includes all Government health facilities, Mission hospitals, Municipality health facilities, designated Not for Profit institutions like New Start Centres, designated private institutions and laboratories, PSMI, Lancet laboratory, and CIMAS.