The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
A movie to highlight the challenges that female artistes in Bulawayo are facing is being shot. The movie that is being produced by filmmakers from the city’s Graphical and Technological Innovations (GTI) studios is called Roads Untravelled. It is a one hour, 30 minute long production that is being shot in Cowdray Park, Pelandaba, Hillside and the CBD. It is due for release next month. With a cast of artistes from different fields such as modelling, acting, cosmetics and music, one of the producers, Dominic ‘Nic’ Ticharwa said Roads Untravelled is about female artistes who connect through the Internet to inspire, share ideas and motivate each other. “The film shows the struggles the female artistes go through as they travel to various places to record videos or take pictures in some hard to reach places just to get that perfect shot. “Finally they decided to create one film production together which won international awards,” said Nic. Among the cast is Natasha Carol Gora, who is best known for her rise in the modelling career from being the Face of Cosmopolitan nightspot to being a Miss Tourism Zimbabwe 2019 finalist. Other cast members include Zandile Nkosingiphile Phiri, Thandekile Nkomo, Tatenda T8, Nicolette Mdluli, Faith Berry Kagwida, Yvonne Jiyane, Linda Tania Ncube, Vuyelwa Olacy Moyo, Sallyan S. Mero, actors Andrew Sibanda, Bethel Nyamanyunzu, Blessed Konjera, Calvin Madula, Arnold Pizza K, Chaka and Sylvester L Kesa. Nic said the movie’s soundtrack was composed by DJ Givencii, Stones Moyo and Men of influence. GTI, a company run by Nic, Sindiso ‘Sean’ Ndebele and Gora was formed in 2008. Sean said they were excited as this is their first professional movie as all along, they have been producing short films. “We started off in 2008 as high school kids and produced short films but they never got far. We then created a filming studio mostly doing weddings and photo shoots to try and raise money for movie productions as well as to buy more proper filming equipment. “We then tried to make the movie Bruteforce which was meant to premiere in 2018, but was cancelled because the quality was just not on the right track,” he said. As a way of hyping people towards the movie and showing them their capability, GTI on Africa Day, partnered the city’s artistes to release a 20-minute video titled We Are Bulawayo. It featured the likes of Lubalemvelo, Snipers, Megatrons Empire, Men of influence, Umkhathi, Stones Moyo, Ma9, DJ Givencii and Focus Acappella. “The idea behind the video was to try and show the world who we really are. We wanted to try and create a video that would represent everyone residing in Bulawayo in every aspect,” said Gora. – @mthabisi_mthire.