The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
GOVERNMENT has commended the private sector for contributing towards the fight against Covid-19 saying only collective efforts will enable the country to adequately deal with the pandemic. Bulawayo Provincial Affairs Minister Cde Judith Ncube said this on Monday while receiving a donation of mealie- meal, flour and bed linen for Ekusileni Medical Centre. The donation was made by Flynote Investment, a milling company operating from Thorngrove industrial site. The donation was part of the company’s social corporate responsible. Several companies have been contributing towards fighting Covid-19 in both cash and kind. Accepting the donation, Minister Ncube said the company has heeded President Mnangagwa’s call that no sector should be left behind in fighting Covid-19. “On behalf of the Government, the President and my own behalf, I want to thank Flynote Investment for the donation that you have made towards fighting Covid-19. The President declared Covid-19 a national disaster, hence it calls for all of us work to put our heads together. We are pleased that the private sector is contributing towards fighting Covid-19,” said Minister Ncube. “We all have to play our part towards ensuring that this disease does not spread. I was told that your organisation is the third largest miller in the country, hence we urge you to continue making us proud as a city. This donation will come handy for the city as it continues to prepare itself to handle Covid-19.” She said part of the donated material will be used to produce face masks as it is mandatory that those going out of their homes should be putting on them. Flynote Investment director Mr Hafiz Naeem said although he was an investor from Pakistan, he also has a role to play in fighting Covid-19 in the country. “The virus knows no boundary and we are part of the community here, therefore we saw it necessary to make this donation. This is a difficult for the world and it calls for all of us to contribute in any way possible towards ensuring the world is safe from coronavirus,” said Mr Naeem. — @nqotshili.