The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Business Correspondent
THE application for Government’s $17 million youth relief fund closes by the end of business today with over 4 300 youth having applied for the fund so far. Government through the Ministry of Youth, Arts and Sports Recreation launched the fund recently, with the aim of assisting youth entrepreneurs and associations affected by the Covid-19 pandemic. Beneficiaries are set to receive a maximum of between $3 000 and $5 000 each. Youth organisations are among businesses that have come to a halt due to the ongoing lockdown. As such, Government has said that priority would be given to youth organisations engaged in the manufacturing and distribution of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and those who are conducting public awareness campaigns on the pandemic. The fund will be channelled to the youth as grants with possible beneficiaries of the relief fund being existing and operating enterprises run by Zimbabwean youths. These youth businesses should have been operating for at least six months before the start of the lockdown on March 30. Zimbabwe Youth Council (ZYC), which is responsible for the application process, said they have received over 4 300 applicants nationwide. The applications are done online and for the rural folk they are done at youth offices at ward level through the organisations representatives. ZYC head of business development, data and research Mr Sungano Chisina said Harare and Bulawayo were topping the list of the applicants. “The applications are being received online due to the circumstances we are in where people cannot freely move around. “By end of day on Friday we had received 4 332 applications with Harare and Bulawayo topping the list from our target of having 5 000 beneficiaries,” said Mr Chisina. He said as a result of network challenges faced by the rural folk, rural youths were advised to get in touch with the ward youth officers countrywide. He also said there have been low applications coming from the rural areas. “The rural provinces have been advised to use ward youth officers to further disseminate information and ensure that all districts were represented. “There has been low uptake from rural areas although the initiative to use ward and district youth officers so that they may receive such applications on WhatsApp or through the local leadership,” said Mr Chisina. He said each province would receive an equal amount from the $17 million relief fund. “Provinces will get equal shares of the $17 million and disbursements will be through the bank,” said Mr Chisina. — @mthabisi_mthire.