The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent 
ZANU-PF Matabeleland South Provincial Youth League has donated hand sanitisers to the province to help curb the spread of Covid-19. The provincial youth league chairman, Cde Washington Nkomo handed over 280 litres of hand sanitisers to Matabeleland South Provincial Affairs Minister, Cde Abednico Ncube on Wednesday. Each of the seven districts in the province is expected to receive 40 litres each. Cde Nkomo said the gesture was in line with President Mnangagwa’s call for everyone to practice hygiene. He said the Youth League was also sourcing face masks which will also be donated to the province. “Our President Emmerson Mnangangwa has emphasised on the importance for people to practice hygiene as one of the measures to curb the spread of Covid-19. Hygiene requires people to sanitise their hands. “As the Zanu-PF Matabeleland South Youth League we realised that we had a role to play considering that some people don’t have access to the hand sanitisers,” he said. “We then saw if fit that we mobilise these hand sanitisers which we are handing over to the province. “We are working on mobilising face masks and as soon as they are ready, we will hand them over to the province as well. “As the youth we are concerned with the pandemic that has affected our people in a great way and we want to assist in any way possible to fight this pandemic.” Cde Ncube applauded the youths for coming up with the noble idea which will ease the burden on the province. He urged various stakeholders to assist in either cash or kind towards the fight against Covid-19. “It’s good to see our youths taking an active role in fighting Covid-19. Like we have been repeatedly saying it’s not only Government’s responsibility to fight this pandemic but we all have a part to play. This pandemic doesn’t care about colour, race, tribe or political affiliation but it requires a united and responsible people. Let’s all emulate this noble act by the Zanu-PF youths and let’s play our part,” he said. The Ministry of Water, Climate and Rural Resettlement has also handed over 2 400 by 150 millilitres of sodium hypochlorite which is used as a disinfectant to Matabeleland South Province. The donation was handed over to Cde Ncube by Zimbabwe National Water Authority (Zinwa) Umzingwane catchment manager Mr Farirai George Mazira on Tuesday. Most communities in rural areas in the province get their water from unprotected water sources, a situation which makes them susceptible to water-borne diseases. — @DubeMatutu