The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
THE Turkish Embassy yesterday donated 10 wheelchairs to disabled people living at Jairos Jiri Centre in Nguboyenja suburb. The donation was made after a community disability coordinator Mrs Anne Malinga observed the challenges in accessing wheelchairs by people living with disabilities. The beneficiaries, some of whom were using walking sticks to move around, were all smiles after the wheelchairs were handed over to them. Bulawayo Provincial Affairs Minister Bulawayo Judith Ncube received the wheelchairs from Turkish Embassy official Mr Adam Yidi Wadi who was representing Ambassador Hakan Kivanc. Minister Ncube said the donation was critical as it was extended to vulnerable people not able to buy for themselves. “This is what the President has always emphasised, the need to engage and re-engage. This donation is a result of the good relations that we all need as people. “We need to engage with both locals and foreign institutions so as to improve the lives of our people. As Bulawayo, as Government and Zimbabwe we are excited when our less privileged are assisted,” she said. Minister Ncube said she is often troubled when she sees the vulnerable facing challenges with no one helping them. She expressed gratitude to the Turkish Embassy for extending the donations, saying it will come handy for the disabled. Mr Wadi said the donation was a gift from the people of Turkey who understood the people’s plight. “After distributing hampers when we visited here last month. We were told of the concerns about the challenges people resident in this institution are facing. Hence, we engaged the Turkish Ambassador His Excellency Ambassador Hakan Kivanc who engaged his government and donated these wheelchairs,” said Mr Wadi. He said the embassy wants to touch a lot of people through humanitarian work and he pledged that it will continue assisting vulnerable communities. Speaking on behalf of the beneficiaries, Ms Bridget Ndlovu said most of them were struggling to get a wheelchair as they are not employed. She said wheelchairs lessen pressure on their helpers who sometimes have to carry them. “We are grateful for this donation. We could not easily move from one point to another but this lessens the burden on us as well as those who assist. They no longer need to constantly carry us as some of them were now having backaches,” she said. Another beneficiary Gogo Virginia Tanda said she had lived for four years without a wheelchair. She said as result she was always grounded as she could not move. Mr Prince Tshuma said while he was still able to move using a walking stick, age was affecting him. “Disability worsens with age. So, the wheelchair comes handy for my mobility. Now I can move for longer distances without any challenges,” said Mr Tshuma. Mrs Malinga, the disability coordinator said funds permitting a similar programme can be extended to people living with disabilities in communities. — @nqotshili