The Chronicle Wayne Chiridza, Showbiz Reporter
WITH the world now turning to the Internet for interaction since most people are on lockdown due to the Covid-19 pandemic, dating is also changing with those who are single, turning to online dating. Realising that people were in great need of this platform, a local entrepreneur, Prince “P Styllz” Mudzingwa and his business partner TeeMak, came up with a dating application so that singles could mix and mingle with the hope of finding love. The application named Styllz Dating was launched last week and is now available on the Apple Store and Google Play Store for download. P Styllz, a youthful socialite, who is also one of the organisers of the One House Zimbabwe reality show, said he decided to introduce the online dating app to give Zimbabweans their own platform as people usually use foreign applications like Tinder. He said the app is easy to use as all someone needs to do is register and profile themselves as well as post images. This information, some which is optional, is what will be viewed by the potential partners in the quest to establish a relationship from the site. The application though made for Zimbabweans, can be used anywhere in the world. A quick use proved that most people on the site so far are Zimbabweans in the United Arab Emirates with some from South Africa. Those based in Zimbabwe also reflected, but just a few likely because most have not yet joined. As the app is strictly for those who are in search of a partner, it becomes easy to start a conversation as everyone knows what exactly they are looking for. Commenting on the app, P Styllz said: “I created this application so as to bring Zimbabweans who are in search of love and want to connect with others together.” He said it is encouraging how the application already has good reviews from Zimbabweans who have joined thus far. However, some have been complaining that they keep seeing the same people in their range. P Styllz pleaded with people to be patient saying the app which is less than a week old, had not yet gained many users. “The app is still new but once people embrace it, people will start being inundated with likes so they need to be patient as more and more people are joining daily.” The personality who is hard at work working on logistics for the One House show said above all, he wanted to show locals that it is possible to have their own international applications. “It’s my hope that this (launch of online app) has served as an empowerment to fellow youths that they can also do what other people outside the country are doing. Nothing is stopping them, they can also do these things if they put their minds to it. We want to show the world that Zimbabwe can also do big things,” P Styllz. And indeed, P Styllz and TeeMak have been changing the game in Zimbabwe by uplifting the likes of Enzo Ishall through signing him and treating him like a top celebrity. Also, if their plan to host One House Zimbabwe comes to pass, they will have indeed put the county on the map as the reality show, where the winner is expected to walk away with US$50 000 is set to be shown on international TV platforms so that people from outside the country access the show. — @waynecas