The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
ABOUT two years after launching an audacious crowd-funding initiative aimed at raising about R30 million to clear the Highlanders debt, South African-based Bosso member Nodumo Nyathi has started another campaign for the same cause. Nyathi, who is chairman of the clubs South African supporters’ chapter, has remodelled the campaign he rolled out yesterday, targeting at least 1 000 Bosso fans, who are keen to contribute a once-off R500 to help Highlanders extinguish their debt. The 2018 campaign ran under the banner R30 challenge, targeting Bossos followers and sympathisers based in South Africa and abroad, who the supporters’ chapter believe are more than one million. Busani Mthombeni, the South African chapter treasurer, said the R30 challenge raised about R7 000, with about 40 people contributing. The funds were deposited into an FNB bank account and the chapter engaged HL Chartered Accountants and Registered Auditors for accountability purposes. Nyathi said they had decided to remodel the campaign, as only a limited number of committed Highlanders followers are key to achieving their goal. “The last campaign had lots of people promising to be active, but they failed to honour their word. A fact that we should all know is that Highlanders can sink into oblivion if its people don’t intervene to save the institution. We have set up a group of people with Highlanders at heart dotted all over the world so that we raise money for the club. Our target is to have at least 1 000 people committed to the cause and even if we are to have 100 people, I believe we can raise a substantial amount to help the club. It is my dream that we clear the club’s debt and with people who share the same vision around, that is possible,” said Nyathi. Besides clearance of the club’s debt believed to be about $1 million, some funds will be channeled to support the club’s other projects. Sidumisile Ntini, who is based in Canada, said a WhatsApp group titled Bosso Debt Clearance has been created and is made up of participants committed to raising funds. “The Bosso Debt Clearance group is specifically a platform for crowdfunding on behalf of the club. There are a number of Highlanders supporters WhatsApp groups and we are confident that we will be able to raise substantial amounts. Like Nodumo said, we are looking at people contributing at least a once-off equivalent of R500 or US$30,” said Ntini. “Those joining the cause are fully aware of what the goal is and have trust that the funds will go to their intended cause. If we work together as Highlanders people, we can save our club.”