The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
SOME residents in Gwanda have turned their homes into vending sites as they sell an assortment of goods from their houses in a bid to raise money. Speaking recently during a district coordination meeting on Covid-19 mitigation interventions, Gwanda District Environment Health Officer, Mr Vumani Ngulube said residents had mounted tables in their yards where they had displayed their wares. He said goods that were being sold included vegetables, grocery items, weaves among other things. People in the mining town are also reportedly selling meat from their houses. “We have been conducting inspections in the town and we have noted with great concern that people in the high-density suburbs have turned their homes into vending sites. They have mounted tables in their yards where they have displayed their goods and people are buying from these points. “At first, they were selling vegetables but now they have an assortment of goods which comprise grocery items such as bread, sugar, flour and soap. Some also have weaves. This is now common in almost all suburbs in the high-density areas. Some of these people are arguing that they are licensed vendors who are paying rates to the municipality but at the moment don’t have markets to operate from. “This is a huge concern as their activities will pose a health threat and they are violating the rule of social distancing,” he said. Mr Ngulube said some residents prefer to buy groceries from the houses as they were cheaper compared to prices charged by shops. He also raised a concern over the failure by members of the public to observe social distancing in business centres in rural areas. He said some shops which were not selling essential products were open ignoring the lockdown order. “We have noticed laxity in some business centres in rural areas. People will be busy drinking beer in groups not observing the rule of social distancing. Some shops which don’t sell essentials such as bottle stores are operating, which is not in line with the lockdown directive and such issues must be addressed immediately,” he said. Also speaking during the same meeting Gwanda Environmental Health Training Officer, Mr Clever Ncube said they had engaged Zupco buses to ensure that they carried 32 passengers while kombis were supposed to carry seven passengers. – @DubeMatutu