The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIFA and a number of former Masvingo United players have mourned the death of prominent businessman Tanda ‘Mhunga’ Tavaruva, who died at his Masvingo home on Monday afternoon after a long battle with diabetes and hypertension. He was 84. In its condolence message, Zifa said the late Tavaruva was a man, who embodied football, not only in Masvingo, but in Zimbabwe as a whole. It said he had a passion for the game as well as the upliftment of the society through creation of employment across the business and sporting sectors. “He lived for the game, loved the game and most importantly ensured it contributed to the welfare of thousands of families in and around Masvingo through his transport, farming and football investments. “We cannot mention the Premier Soccer League and indeed Zimbabwean football without mentioning Mhunga and Masvingo United. Today we mourn the passing away of another giant in football,” said Zifa communications and competitions manager Xolisani Gwesela. Some former Masvingo United players also mourned the death of Tavaruva. The former players took to social media to express their condolences to the man, who laid a foundation for their careers, with South Africa-based Ovidy Karuru saying what made it even more painful was that they will not be able to be present at the burial of the man they regarded as their father due to travel restrictions caused by the Covid-19 lockdown. “Tanda Tavaruva, Mudhara Mhunga. God why now when we can’t travel to pay our last respects? I can’t be there to pay my last respect to the man who made me who I am today, no words. Rest In Peace baba vangu, another angel called to heaven,” wrote Karuru on Facebook. Blessing Gumiso, who had a season at the side described the late Tavaruva as a football loving person, who was always jovial and cracked jokes with players. “Rest in peace our football father. It was a blessing playing a season for Masvingo, Una Una. I shall forever cherish you. I remember when you used to come to camp with a big envelope full of bonuses asking for a win before games and you would crack jokes before leaving. Until we meet again,” wrote Gumiso. Other former players like Tapiwa Khumbuyani, Johnson Zimbabe and India-based Simbarashe Gate also expressed their condolences on the passing away of the businessman. Tavaruva owned and funded one of the most talented Masvingo United sides that went within a whisker of landing the Premiership title. The squad consisted of the likes of Tafadzwa Dube, George Magariro, Douglas Zimbago, Karuru, Gate, Ferdinand Mwachindalo, Isaac Nyausaru, Itai Gwandu, Wonder Sithole, Godfrey Dondo, Khumbuyani, Zimbabe and Costa Nhamoinesu, among a number of fine football legs in the country. Yuna Yuna grabbed their first silverware in the top light league in 2002 when they beat Railstars 4-3 after a penalty shoot out in the Zifa Unity Cup and repeated the same feat in 2005, beating Highlanders 3-1 through the penalty lottery again. They also beat Bosso 5-4 in another shootout in the OK Woza Bhora Cup in 2005. They lifted the first Independence Cup in 2006, beating Caps United 3-1 in a penalty shootout and retained the trophy in 2007 with a convincing 3-0 drubbing of Highlanders. They were then relegated from the topflight league in 2011.