The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
THERE is a need for serious social dialogue to save jobs in the wake of the devastating economic impact of Covid-19 on businesses, an official has said. As a result of business disruptions due to Covid-19, some companies have resorted to job cuts. Also, many company executives are finding it difficult to pay salaries and sustain operational budgets following imposition of lockdown measures, which forced some business to cease operations. In view of the challenges facing the business sector, Government recently announced an $18 billion stimulus package to cushion various economic sectors and salvage the economy. In an interview, executive director of the Employers’ Confederation of Zimbabwe (EMCOZ), Mrs Nester Mukwehwa said some companies had started shedding jobs but social dialogue was necessary to save them. Mrs Mukwehwa said it was prudent for employers to start reviewing their revenue positions to determine how they can manage salary obligations. She stressed the need for social dialogue between employers and workers at businesses facing Covid-19 induced challenges so as to have a win-win solution. “So, those who went on lockdown what we are advising is that they need to sit down and look at their coffers and see whether they can pay salaries or not because we can’t prescribe as the employers representatives to say all employers pay salaries or don’t because people are sitting at different levels at their companies,” she said. “So, we are calling for social dialogue at the workplace between the employer and the employees.” Mrs Mukwehwa said unless supportive measures were put in place, there are fears of imminent jobs cuts and closure of companies reeling under the negative impact of Covid-19. Labour representative body, the Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions (ZCTU), called upon the Government to involve labour bodies in formulating Covid-19 response strategies so as to come up with inclusive solutions. ZCTU general secretary Mr Japhet Moyo also said social dialogue was important in such matters. “Social dialogue is important. We would encourage that we increase the efforts around involving the workers at the local and national level in response to Covid-19. Workers are at the front and need involvement,” he said.