The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
ORLANDO Pirates midfielder Ben Motshwari has become the first South African Premier Soccer League footballer to test positive for Covid-19 bringing to two the number of South African sportspersons to test positive for the virus following cricketer Solomzi Nqweni’s confirmed case yesterday. According to the Sowetan, the 26-year-old fast-bowling all-rounder‚ who is recovering from Guillain-Barre syndrome‚ announced on Twitter that he’s a Covid-19 statistic. “So last year I got GBS‚ and have been battling this disease for the past 10 months and I’m only half way through my recovery. I got TB‚ my liver failed and my kidney failed. Now today I tested positive for coronavirus. I don’t understand why all of this is happening to me‚” wrote Nqweni on Twitter. Motshwari’s condition was confirmed yesterday on a day that the National Soccer League board of governors was set to hold a crucial virtual meeting to give an indication on the way forward regarding the Absa 2019/20 season. Pirates confirmed the development via a statement yesterday. “Orlando Pirates Football Club can confirm that Ben Motshwari has tested positive for Covid-19. Ben was presented with flu like symptoms last week and after undergoing tests, his results have come back positive.” The player is asymptomatic and is currently in home isolation for the next 14 days. He will need to test negative before he is cleared. The club said the health and wellbeing of its players, officials, and the wider community remains its highest priority during this difficult time. It advised that the player must notify doctors about all the people he has been in contact with to ensure that they also get tested. “We urge everybody to continue practicing safe and healthy measures to contain and mitigate the spread of the infection. Always wash your hands; wear masks in public and always remember to practice social distancing,” read the club’s statement. While a number of Zimbabwean players ply their trade in South Africa, Orlando Pirates have no Zimbabwean player in their books.