The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
GOVERNMENT has said the date for reopening of schools is yet to be set and will be guided by the country’s progress in fighting Covid-19 as well as consultations with relevant stakeholders. Schools were prematurely closed in March due to the Covid-19 threat. Government recently announced that schools will be reopened in a five-phase approach starting with 2020 examination classes. A debate is already raging on as whether schools are ready to be reopened, especially as universities and other tertiary institutions are set to reopen starting Monday. Speaking during Matabeleland South Chapter of the Covid-19 Schools Response Plan at Mtshabezi High School yesterday in Gwanda District, Primary and Secondary Education Minister Cain Mathema, said the date for the reopening of schools should be a product of inclusive consultations and the realities of Covid-19 threat in the country. “With the respect to the reopening of schools, there has been some understandable anxiety on the part of parents and children on when schools will open again. I would like to reiterate that the opening date will be determined by the progress that we make as a nation in fighting the coronavirus,” Minister Mathema. “The process also involves engaging stakeholders so that the best decision can be taken in the interest of our learners, teachers and other workers in the schools and communities. It’s a job that belongs to us all. Let’s dialogue until we come up with the right answer.” He said when schools re-open, the Ministry will proceed with the five-phased approach starting with 2020 examination classes and the last to open being Early Childhood Development learners. Minister Mathema commended schools for their contribution in fighting Covid-19. He made the remarks after going through displays from schools in the province of their preparedness towards schools reopening. The schools are producing face masks and sanitisers that are key towards mitigating Covid-19. Minister Mathema said the learning institutions will be counted among those who made a difference post covid-19 pandemic. “There is no doubt that Covid-19 is a fatal disease that has potential to devastate communities, and this is why as education we have no choice but to take advantage of our huge numbers and competitive advantages to contribute to an effective and rapid response. As I have said before, I have no doubt that history will ask each one of us what we did during the fight against the Covid-19 pandemic. As Zimbabweans, we must enter the annals of history as a people who rose to the occasion and stood up when it mattered,” said Minister Mathema. The minister expressed concern over the number of people escaping from quarantine centres, saying they were putting lives of their families and ordinary citizens at risk. He said with Thursday’s 149 national Covid-19 cases, it would be prudent for the nation to be more vigilant. Minister Mathema said schools need to have running water as they prepare for the reopening of schools. He commended Mtshabezi High School for its advanced state of preparedness towards reopening of schools as it has procured almost all the requisite face masks for pupils, sanitisers and thermometers. In attendance was the Minister of State for Provincial Affairs Matabeleland South, Cde Abednico Ncube who said in light of the global pandemic, the education sector should ensure that the 2020 year is salvaged. He said while the country continues to receive returnees from South Africa and Botswana, it was of concern that border jumpers were putting lives of citizens at risk. “We want to call upon our community leaders so that they report such activities so that measures can be taken by the relevant authorities to ensure the well-being of our communities,” he said. The event was also attended by Primary and Secondary Education Deputy Minister Edgar Moyo, Primary and Secondary Education Ministry Permanent Secretary Mrs Tumisang Thabela, among other stakeholders in the education sector. — @nqotshili.