The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
CHIEF Shana of Jambezi in Hwange District has said educating rural communities on how to prevent Covid-19 is critical in ensuring that every citizen plays a part in the fight against the global pandemic. Speaking during a visit to his area by a delegation from Enlightened Christian Gathering (ECG) Church led by Pastor Pinias Sibanda from Victoria Falls branch yesterday, Chief Shana said he had taken it upon himself to educate his subjects about the pandemic with the help of police and health officials. “We can safely say people are now aware of coronavirus although education should be continuous. After the pronouncement of the lockdown by the President I took it upon myself working with police and health workers to conduct awareness campaigns around all the wards in my area to make sure the message gets to every household. We can’t afford to have people dying because of carelessness hence we urge everyone to observe the lockdown,” said Chief Shana. He said he had conducted campaigns in Jambezi, Sidinda, Mbizha, Nemananga, Chikandakubi, Matetsi and Lubangwe wards which make up his area of jurisdiction. Chief Shana said he had established that some villagers at Tamuka village in Makorokoro area had been secretly brewing traditional beer where people had been gathering to drink thereby violating lockdown rules. He said he had appealed to police to visit the area and arrest the villagers involved. The ECG delegation had visited the area to donate mealie meal, soya mince, cooking oil, sugar, bars of soap, second hand clothes and sanitary pads. The goods were mobilised by ECG Victoria Falls branch. Addressing close to 200 villagers at BH3 yesterday, Pastor Sibanda urged people to observe social distancing and to wash hands with running water as these are the primary health guidelines for preventing Covid-19. “We have been sent by our founder Prophet Shepherd Bushiri to give food and other items to our people who are in need as we also share information on how we can work together in fighting coronavirus. “We want to thank Chief Shana for allowing us into his area and for helping to identify the needy. Wherever you are, make sure you have face masks and regularly wash your hands with soap and running water as well as using the recommended hand sanitiser. There has been a lot of awareness in towns and this has to filter into rural areas too,” said Pastor Sibanda. The villagers were drawn from seven villages in Nyikanyoro area. Some of them wore home-made face masks. Nyikanyoro headman Mr John Smart Sibanda thanked the ECG Church. “We are grateful for this gesture because most families have no food. We sometimes get both food hampers and monetary pay-outs from Social Welfare. We appreciate the education and we hope people will abide by what we are taught, “ he said.-@ncubeleon