The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
THE Judicial Service Commission (JSC) has said courts will operate will skeleton staff when business resumes next Monday and anyone who forces employees to report for duty without protective clothing will be disciplined. The JSC said as part of measures to stop the spread of Covid-19 when courts resume business, it will supply personal protective equipment (PPE) to members of staff. It said any person entering the courthouse or JSC offices including all members of staff, litigants, legal practitioners and other court users shall be required to wear a face mask, shall be sanitised and submit to temperature testing before being allowed to enter. Acting JSC secretary, Mr Walter Chikwanha directed court officials to post the notices at each courthouse or office outlining the health requirements. “His Excellency, the President ED Mnangagwa has pronounced the level 2 phased relaxation of the national lockdown with effect from 4 May 2020. Following this pronouncement, the Chief Justice has directed that all courts become operational with effect from 11 May 2020,” said Mr Chikwanha. He said each head of station is required to identify two members of staff to constitute the Covid-19 health regulations enforcement team. Mr Chikwanha said these Covid-19 health regulations enforcement officers will be authorised to refuse entry to anyone including a head of station who refuses to submit to the health requirements. He said heads of stations should arrange court orderlies/police to enforce the health requirements. “For avoidance of doubt, members of staff who have underlying health conditions shall be excused from reporting for duty,” he said. Mr Chikwanha said entrance into courtroom will strictly be restricted to litigants, legal practitioners, witnesses who are giving evidence and members of the press. “One entrance at courthouse or JSC offices shall be used to ensure strict monitoring of compliance with the health regulations,” he said. Mr Chikwanha said all offices and courtrooms must be disinfected regularly. He said the social distancing rule of at least one metre apart must be observed at all times. “Registrars and Clerks of Court are requested to arrange furniture in all courtrooms in a manner which complies with the social distancing requirements. In offices where there are workstations and observance of the social distancing rule is untenable, heads of stations are required to make arrangements for members of staff to rotate so that members of staff are not squeezed in offices. Congestion in offices is strictly prohibited,” said Mr Chikwanha. He said in order to comply with social distancing rules, courts and offices will in the meantime be manned by skeleton staff. “Heads of stations must come up with weekly duty rosters in this respect. The secretary, heads of departments and members of the secretariat will be conducting spot checks on the arrangements made,” said Mr Chikwanha. He said every head of station must ensure that there are adequate PPEs in stock for members of staff. “It is an act of misconduct to force a member of staff to report for duty without providing him or her with hand sanitiser and face mask,” said Mr Chikwanha. He said disinfection of the premises, courtrooms, chambers and offices should start tomorrow and must be completed by Sunday ahead of resumption of business on Monday.