The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
CLOSE to 1 000 households in Cowdray Park yesterday received hygiene kits to ensure residents exercise personal hygiene in light of the prevailing Covid-19 pandemic. The donation consisted of bar soaps, water tablets and 40-litre containers per household to collect water for hand sanitisation at homes. The programme is being funded by Unicef through a non-governmental organisation (NGO) Moriti oa Sechaba that has partnered with Bulawayo City Council (BCC) and National Aids Council (Nac) among others, to ensure the initiative is rolled out in the city. Receiving the first batch of the donations on behalf of the residents yesterday at Cowdray Park Housing office, Zanu-PF councillor for Ward 28 Kidwell Mujuru urged residents to utilise the donation taking note of the water crisis in the city. “Many communities in and around Bulawayo have no access to clean and running water. Thus, they are exposed to poor sanitation and lack adequate and proper food during this difficult of Covid-19 pandemic period. “Through your timely intervention, we hope all this will ensure the virus is mitigated in the homes of the residents,” said Clr Mujuru. Clr Mujuru vowed to ensure that there is transparency in the distribution of the hygienic kits. “Covid-19 knows no political boundaries and church denominations. So, let’s all work together and harness our resources in trying to control the spread of Covid-19,” said Clr Mujuru. Moriti oa Sechaba hygiene promotion officer Mr Pym Ncube said the programme will also be rolled out to places where residents meet in numbers. “We are targeting to provide hygiene kits to 1 000 households in the suburb so as to ensure that homes adhere to the constant washing of hands. The hygienic kits will also be placed at places where residents gather in numbers and these include boreholes and bus stops. The city is faced with water shortages thus the water tablets will ensure they drink clean and safe water,” said Mr Ncube. Moriti oa Sechaba is known for spearheading the water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) programme in Matabeleland South province. Cowdray Park BPRA secretary Mr Nevson Chigondo said community leaders have mobilised volunteers to distribute the hygiene kits and also conduct door to door Covid-19 awareness campaigns. — @mthabisi_mthire.