The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
BULAWAYO Province Soccer Coaches Association (Bupsca) held its first online seminar aimed at improving the value and skills of gaffers. Former Bulawayo City FC goalkeepers trainer Reginald Buhali was the first to present on qualities of a goalkeeper. He highlighted that a good goalkeeper should possess excellent communication, be able to position themselves well, have super reflexes and be comfortable with ball distribution. Buhali stressed that for the country to produce good goalkeepers, there’s need for Zifa to ensure all teams have a goalkeepers’ coach from junior level up to the senior side. He also called for coaching clinics specifically for goalkeepers’ trainers. “Resources may not permit hiring of goalkeepers’ coaches but since all coaches have covered goalkeeping as part of training during their level courses, it is prudent to empower the coaches with relevant skills to produce a goalkeeper that has mastered basic goalkeeping skills. “Goalkeepers should start mastering basic skills from as young as five years. We should have academies for goalkeepers only where ball familiarisation and falling techniques are the focus,” Buhali said. Nkosilathi Moyo delivered a presentation on recovery drills after workouts. He said the correct recovery exercises should be done as some may cause harm to players. Former Zifa education officer Brian Moyo urged coaches to understand the “value” of their brand. Bupsca chairman Bongani Mafu said the sessions are meant to improve the value and skills of Bulawayo coaches. “Coaches should not just mark the field and do tactics, they should be positive life changers. “We should produce players who have a plan for their current earning life and life after earning. We are brands, but we have let people take us for granted. “We have fought for free entrance into stadia then what? Walk home to hungry kids after that? Instead we need to offer something. Love ourselves and sell our skills. “Coach Abraham refused for us to volunteer our service where we can earn. We can help in schools etc, but we need coaches to earn and not to forever learn,” said Mafu. He said through interactions, coaches can learn from their peers as well as those that came before them. Ex-Highlanders coach Kelvin Kaindu, sports journalists Muziwethu Hadebe, Hope Chizuzu and Lovemore Dube were among invited guests for the inaugural seminar. Mafu said his organisation plans to hold more virtual conferences in future. The next session will be held next Monday. — @ZililoR