The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter
WOMEN and girls face increasing vulnerabilities to gender-based violence (GBV) if governments do not find ways to mitigate recurrent climate-related threats such as drought, flooding and diseases outbreak. According to Genderlinks — a gender equality organisation, Covid-19 has worsened the environmental crisis which has had a huge impact on healthcare across Sadc countries. Covid-19-induced lockdown resulted in the rise of GBV cases reported as many people lost their source of income and as such many households were left food insecure. The prolonged lockdown period also exposed women and girls to sexual and physical abuse as the global pandemic forced them to be home near their spouses and relatives who make up the majority of those who abuse women. “The Covid-19 crisis represents an unprecedented wake-up call in the region, reminding leaders that they must prepare for more frequent emergencies linked to climate change. The Covid-19 pandemic exacerbated food insecurity and other social challenges, leaving women and girls in impoverished communities, marginalised people, refugees and other displaced people vulnerable,” read the report. Genderlinks said the Covid-19 will contribute to food insecurity, conflict, and GBV for months and possibly years to come. “The environmental crisis in Sadc has extended from directly affecting agriculture and food security to impacting healthcare across the region. In 2019, climate shocks worsened measles outbreaks and Namibia saw a spike in hepatitis E transmissions in informal settlements due to poor access to water and adequate sanitation.” The organisation added that despite the crisis, Covid-19 also presents an opportunity for governments in the region to re-align their priorities and pursue the development of renewable energy and “greener” economies. “The recent spate of droughts and cyclones have tested the limits of Sadc’s emergency response and raised questions about preparedness and the effectiveness of regional early warning systems. Malnutrition remains high in the region with 13 countries reporting prevalence of stunting at more than 20 percent, of which seven have a prevalence of stunting higher than 30 percent including Zimbabwe.” According to Genderlinks, the severity of the most recent droughts has resulted in a regional crisis that warrants immediate action to avoid more fatalities and emergencies. “Following the 2018/19 El Niño episode, experts predicted that the number of food insecure people in Sadc would rise to 41,2 million. In Zimbabwe the same drought coupled with the Covid-19 pandemic left more than 4,6 million people food insecure.” — @thamamoe