The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
YESTERDAY, an 18-member Warriors squad embarked on a 608km road trip to Malawi’s commercial capital, Blantyre, for an international friendly at Kamuzu Stadium tomorrow. The Warriors’ squad comprised nine locally-based players that last engaged in a competitive match last season, except for Stanley Ngala of FC Platinum, who played against Highlanders in the Castle Challenge Cup, which should have been the 2020 season curtain. However, after that game, all sporting activities were suspended following a Covid-19 enforced lockdown that is still in place, albeit with relaxed restrictions. Also in the squad are three plying their trade in the Zambian league, Takudzwa Chimwemwe (Buildcon), Jimmy Dzingai (Nkana FC) and Tanaka Chinyahara (Red Arrows), and another three, Khama Billiat (Kaizer Chiefs), McClive Phiri (Sekhukhume) and Carlton Mashumba (Polokwane), from the South African league, with the remaining three, Marvelous Nakamba, Teenage Hadebe and Alec Mudimu all based in Europe. Tomorrow’s friendly is part of the two nations’ preparations for the upcoming Africa Cup of Nations qualifiers set for next month, with Malawi squaring off against Burkina Faso and Zimbabwe facing Algeria. From the composition of the Zimbabwean squad, it won’t be off the mark to say the match is not exactly part of preparations for the Algerian match, as Zifa is saying. It can’t be in all senses. Malawi are really serious about having top notch preparations for the Burkina Faso Afcon qualifier and have been in camp since the beginning of this month, with nine foreign-based players for their two friendlies against Zambia played on Wednesday and tomorrow’s encounter with Zimbabwe. It’s almost impossible for coach Zdravko Logarusic to throw in the same squad for the crucial Algeria match, not to say the locally-based players are not good enough, but even their fitness levels are seriously not up to standard for the level of the match against the Desert Foxes. Zifa should have been focusing on the key result area of planning and organising in time for the national team’s preparatory matches. Saying the squad could have been announced before the commencement of the international break, but it “had to be delayed until we had clearance from Government to travel to Malawi for the match” is not good enough. Zifa tells us the Government approved its request to travel to Malawi on October 8, but doesn’t inform us when that request was made. Dates for international friendlies were out in early August and surely for Government to give the green light on Thursday means the request was submitted late. This means Zifa never saw the importance of proper planning for our Warriors to have adequate preparations for a crucial encounter. There is a full secretariat at Zifa led by a chief executive officer, whose job includes planning for the national team. Fifa makes it easier by availing the international break dates well ahead of time, but we are always found wanting. We behave as if the international break come as a surprise to us. They could even have organised two friendly matches just like most countries did, including their opponents tomorrow. This trip to Malawi is now turning out to be just a useless, resource wasting sojourn, which as it stands now, should have been abandoned. Maybe the Warriors should have played FC Platinum to help the league champions prepare for the Total Caf Champions League. The Malawi trip might turn out to be a national embarrassment and a huge dent on coach Loga’s CV, especially considering that he didn’t get the players he wanted. It’s obvious Loga didn’t select the locally-based players, and these would have been selected by his assistants using only a yardstick known by them since there hasn’t been any football this year. We can’t be told that the coach is also using tomorrow’s match to prepare for the Chan finals set for Cameroon next year unless Loga decides to keep this squad for the Algerian encounters. The trip to Malawi was unnecessary and a complete waste of scarce resources. – @skhumoyo200