The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
IN a fortnight, the Warriors will face continental champions Algeria in back to back blockbuster 2021 Afcon Qualifier, needing a positive result to enhance their chances of earning a ticket to the next finals. Going into the matches, national team coach Zdravko Logarusic has been keeping a close eye on the performances of active Warriors plying their trade in European and African leagues that have started their programmes. Zimbabwe are paired in Group H with Algeria who top the table with six points, two ahead of the Warriors who are second, with Botswana in third place with a point while Zambia anchor the log with zero. All the nations have played two games each and for the Warriors, who last played a competitive game last November when they beat Zambia 2-1 in Lusaka courtesy of a Khama Billiat brace heading to the Algeria tie a little bit rusty. Loga is probably having a selection headache as he thinks of which players to call as dates to the Algeria games come close. It’s unfortunate that for these ties locally-based footballers will be overlooked as Loga wants players that are active and match-fit to guide the Warriors. Loga superintended over Zimbabwe’s 0-0 friendly match against Malawi with a depleted side. Most players that the coach wanted for the friendly for assessment failed to turn up. Lyon striker Tino Kadewere, England based pair of Tendai Darikwa and Macauley Bonne as well as Marshal Munetsi who plays in France missed the trip to Malawi. Today, we look at how some of the Warriors players have been performing. Captain Knowledge Musona’s AS Eupen home game against Mechelen on Saturday was postponed. Musona scored and provided an assist in his team’s last match which they won 2-0 against Excel Mouscron on October 18. The Warriors talisman is expected to be in action on Friday against Genk. His new-found form is what Loga hopes will be carried over to the national team. Defender Teenage Hadebe and Marvelous Nakamba were unused substitutes for their respective Turkey and English teams. Nakamba’s Aston Villa who are third in the EPL lost 3-0 to Leeds. The Zimbabwean defensive midfielder has been playing second fiddle to Brazilian Douglas Luiz who is in fine form. In Turkey, for a second successive week, Hadebe was an unused substitute for Yeni Malatyaspor. Billiat continues to be in fine form for Kaizer Chiefs despite Amakhosi having lost their last game 3-0 to Mamelodi Sundowns. Willard Katsande was also in action for Chiefs. Goalkeeper Elvis Chipezeze guarded the goal for Baroka as they beat Maritzburg United 2-1. Warriors’ left backs Divine Lunga and Ronald Pfumbidzai faced off when their teams drew 1-1 in South Africa. Pfumbidzai plays for Bloemfontein Celtics while Lunga turns out for Durban side Golden Arrows. Knox Mutizwa and Danny Phiri were not part of Arrows’ match day squad. Amazulu pair of central midfielder Butho Ncube and winger Talent Chawapihwa started for the KwaZulu-Natal side as they 1-1 with Orlando Pirates. Terence Dzukamanja also starred for Pirates, playing 80 minutes before being pulled out. Winger Kudakwashe Mahachi returned from Covid-19 isolation to play the last 20 minutes of Supersport United’s 2-0 win against Black Leopards. Giant goalkeeper George Chigova was an unused substitute for Supersport. Former Highlanders striker Prince Dube who has set the Tanzanian league alight with breathtaking performances was expected to feature for Azam when they took on Mtibwa Sugar yesterday afternoon. — @ZililoR