The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Acting Sports Editor
EARLY next month on November 9, the Warriors will troop from the National Sports Stadium (NSS) alongside African powerhouse and reigning champions Algeria for a crucial Total Caf African Nations Cup qualifier. The encounter will mark the official return of the people’s game in Zimbabwe since the Covid-19-induced lockdown in March. It’s the return of the people’s game but for this encounter next month, the owners of the game won’t be inside the stadium as part of the safety measures to stop the spread of the pandemic. It will also be the first time that the National Sports Stadium plays host to an international match since its ban by Caf last season for failing to meet requirements expected for a facility that hosts international games. A lot of work was then done to make sure the stadium, together with Barbourfields in Bulawayo are brought to the standards that Caf and Fifa expect. The playing turf at the National Sports Stadium as well as the dressing rooms, media centre and stand were spruced up, leaving only the issue of bucket seats outstanding. Minister of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation Kirsty Coventry last month told Senators that the Government has started the process of acquiring the required bucket seat so that the two stadia are fully compliant. So, when news that the Warriors will play their match against Algeria came through, a lot of people, including other media outlets, got the impression that the National Sports Stadium was finally homologated. The facility hasn’t been homologated at all, instead Caf only gave a temporary reprieve for the stadium to be used due to the Covid-19 pandemic which led to the banning of fans from attending the match. The other reason was on the headache which would have come with scheduling the match outside the country, especially under the Covid-19 uncertainty. With that said, authorities involved in the renovation of the National Sports Stadium must then not sit on their laurels and tell themselves that all is now well. Whatever plans they had for the Zimbabwe stadia must never be abandoned. The bucket seats tender process must be kept alive if not expedited because Caf president Ahmad Ahmad said to Chronicle Sport during a virtual teleconference from the Caf headquarters in Cairo, Egypt, there was no going back on standards. In fact, Ahmad said the only shift from what was expected of stadia would be to come up with more stringent standards which would ensure undoubted safety of the players, fans and all the other stakeholders. So Zifa must keep on reminding the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC) not to remove its foot on the pedal and the SRC in turn will advise the Government, lest it is thought that there is no longer any need for bucket seats. Sitting on our laurels and thinking all is well will be to the nation’s detriment and possible future embarrassment when we become the first country to have all our international matches, including club competitions, played outside the country not because of political instability but due to substandard facilities. As football fans and indeed proud Zimbabweans, we can’t afford to fathom the embarrassment of not having international football in the country but as it stands that day might come if we don’t move with speed on the outstanding things at the National Sports Stadium and Barbourfields Stadium in Bulawayo. It is everyone’s hope that the Minister of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation, Kirsty Coventry will be kept on the loop by the relevant technical arm of sports, SRC for failure to do that will be catastrophic to the nation. It is therefore in the interest of the nation that the bucket seats are installed rather than relaxing the project on the misinformed view that the National Sports Stadium has been homologated, that was only a temporary reprieve due to the Covid-19 pandemic. It’s a refreshing development to have members of the Senate who seem to have a passion for sport and as long as they keep on probing the minister about any developments in sport, we are hopeful the sports ministry will be kept on its toes.