The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Binga
GOVERNMENT is impressed by progress made in projects being implemented through the 100-day cycle as they are already contributing to improvement in citizens’ livelihoods. This was said by the Minister of State for Presidential Affairs and Monitoring Implementation of Government Programmes Joram Gumbo when he toured Sunrise Children’s Home in Binga on Thursday. The Catholic Church run home has seven boys and seven girls aged between two years and 14 years. President Mnangagwa set up the Ministry of State for Presidential Affairs to monitor implementation of Government programmes across all Ministries and departments after realisation that implementation of programmes was being delayed by various sector performance inadequacies. Government also adopted the 100-day target based programme in order to address challenges and expedite project implementation. “I have visited different projects being implemented under the 100-day cycle programme in all the provinces and I am happy to report that results on the ground indicate that the Rapid Results Approach is producing positive results and contributing to the improvement of livelihoods of our people,” said Minister Gumbo. “It is our expectation that the programme will lead to realisation of developmental goals set out in the Transitional Stabilisation Programme and attainment of Vision 2030. The huge transformation that we seek to achieve through the 100-day cycle programme can only happen if the people are involved in the projects as conscious actors for their own emancipation from poverty and underdevelopment.” Minister Gumbo is on a tour of 100-day cycle project in Matabeleland North and is expected to visit other projects in Bubi District today to assess progress. Sunrise Children’s Home is one of such projects as Government disbursed $14 400 as a once off payment and provides monthly grants of $5 600 to the orphanage. Minister Gumbo’s mission was to assess how the monies have been used as part of his ministry’s mandate. He said he was impressed by the way the Catholic Church run institution is being run. He called for a sustainable integration strategy where children accommodated at orphanages should be allowed back into the society as they grow older. Matabeleland North provincial social welfare officer Mr Macnon Chirinzepi said the orphanage used its monthly grants allocation to cater for basic needs of the children and operating costs. He said Government is encouraging children’s homes to adopt a family set up where kids are raised under a mother at the orphanage to give them a feel of a family set up. — @ncubeleon