The Chronicle THE Premier League, EFL, The FA, Women’s Super League and Women’s Championship have written an open letter imploring the Government to allow supporters to return safely to stadiums. Premier League chief executive Richard Masters, his EFL counterpart David Baldwin, FA chief executive Mark Bullingham and FA director of Women’s Professional Game Kelly Simmons have all signed the letter which calls for the return of the test-event programme and consistency in Government policy regarding the re-opening of certain venues and events. National League clubs received an offer of financial aid from the Government to help them start the season last weekend, while a support package for the three divisions below the Premier League remains the subject of ongoing dialogue. The EFL also called for people on Twitter to sign a petition pleading with the Government to let fans back into stadiums. The tweet was retweeted by several EFL clubs as well as the likes of Fleetwood boss Joey Barton. The petition surpassed 103 000 signatures just before 9pm on Tuesday, meaning Parliament has to now consider the topic for debate. The open letter from the governing bodies states that fans should be allowed to return after 11 recent successful test events and says clubs “are considering measures both in the stadium and on the approach that will allay any concerns as to fans’ safety”, with plans in place for spectators inside the ground and travelling to the venues. The various governing bodies also say they will continue to work with scientists and medical experts to pioneer new approaches that will “make sure stadiums are Covid-safe” going forward. While the letter states that the “health of the nation remains our overriding priority”, it calls for the return of supporters for the good of local communities and economies and wants the Government to treat sport “as fairly as other activities currently allowed to welcome spectators”. The full letter reads… The Premier League, EFL, The FA, Women’s Super League and Women’s Championship want to assure all fans that together we are fully committed to your safe return to football grounds as soon as possible. The health of the nation remains our overriding priority, and for many months we have been working with experts to make our grounds as safe as, if not safer than, any other public activity currently allowed. And we are consulting with the Football Supporters’ Association to keep supporters updated every step of the way. We know attendance at matches can play a positive role in people’s lives during these challenging times. And the past few months have shown how clubs can still feel the support of their fans. Even when you have been unable to get together, you and your clubs have found ways to make a difference in your communities, with clubs delivering food parcels, taking part in phone calls and online conversations with fans, the elderly and vulnerable and moving services and programmes online to make a difference in unprecedented and challenging circumstances. But we all know football is not the same without fans. Every player and manager is missing the direct connection with you and the impact that you have on our games. With the EFL, Premier League, Women’s Super League and Women’s Championship already staging 11 successful test events recently, we have demonstrated that we can deliver matches safely. The sooner we can return, the sooner we can reunite communities and support local jobs, livelihoods, regional businesses and also the national economy. We will continue to urge Government to allow us to return fans safely to stadiums. It is positive progress that major arts and music venues have been told they can run socially-distanced events indoors. And now football should be allowed to do the same – in highly regulated and stewarded outdoor environments. Additionally, representatives from football are active members of the Government’s Sports Technology and Innovation Group, as well as being involved with their ‘Moonshot’ mass-testing project to open up the economy. And in light of the postponement of test events we will intensify our efforts to pioneer new approaches – working with epidemiologists, scientists and medical experts in areas such as public health, clinical processes and occupational hygiene. This will make sure stadiums are Covid-safe by considering best practice screening and hygiene methods to ensure that fans and the general public will be safe and drive the Government’s sporting plans to move faster. Stadium environments can be modified and carefully managed. Measures could include screening spectators before they enter the ground, installing temperature checks, requiring masks to be worn, one-way systems and providing a code of conduct for all those attending on a matchday. This will all be bolstered by deep-cleaning practices to help further reduce the risk of virus transmission. Clubs want to be pro-active on this matter and are considering measures both in the stadium and on the approach that will allay any concerns as to fans’ safety. From a travel perspective, clubs will work closely with experts and local authorities to model solutions relevant for each stadium to ease pressure on public transport, while extra parking facilities could be available so a greater proportion of you can travel by private car or bicycle. We are determined to identify a path forward with Government. We need clarity for our clubs and for you as supporters as to what the roadmap for change in this area looks like. We all know why caution is needed, and we ask Government for consistency in their policy so sport is treated as fairly as other activities currently allowed to welcome spectators. So, we will continue to urge the relevant authorities to let us, together, use innovative ways to bring fans safely back into football grounds, starting with a return of the test event programme. If we do so, then the benefits will be felt not just by fans but throughout society and the economy. Richard Masters, Premier League Chief Executive David Baldwin, EFL Chief Executive Mark Bullingham, The FA Chief Executive Kelly Simmons, The FA Director of Women’s Professional Game -Sky Sports