The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
THE response to Covid-19 by institutions of higher and tertiary education through manufacturing sanitisers, face masks and testing swabs is proof that the re-modelling of the sector is paying dividends while reducing the country’s import bill. Government in 2017 adopted Education 5.0 which focuses on innovation and industrialisation, replacing Education 3.0 which largely encouraged grasping of theory without the ability of turning the learnt concepts into goods and services. The concentration on memorising concepts saw industrialists slamming universities for producing graduates that failed to meet industry expectations. However, Government has said the adoption of Education 5.0 has given a new impetus to the higher and tertiary education sector which is meeting the country’s societal demands. Higher and Tertiary Education, Innovation, Science and Technology Development Minister Professor Amon Murwira told Senators last Thursday, that the adoption of Education 5.0 has changed the face of the higher and tertiary education. He said as the world grapples with Covid-19, universities and colleges in the country came to the party to ensure that the virus is contained through producing Personal Protective Equipment (PPE). The National University of Science and Technology (Nust) conducted Covid-19 tests in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and Child Care while also producing sanitisers and face masks. “This education must be in the forefront in fending for the country. We saw universities manufacturing sanitisers and we had many sanitizers at hospitals. The sanitisers were manufactured by Great Zimbabwe University, Mutare Polytechnic, Nust, Harare Institute of Technology, Midlands State University and Bindura University of Science and Education,” he said. “Another measure of success is seeing things changing. They also manufactured face masks, right now they are also manufacturing swabs used for Covid-19 testing; they are also manufacturing drips which we used to import from other countries. The drips are 99,9 percent water and salt, we used to get these drips from other countries.” Prof Murwira said Great Zimbabwe University is also producing doctors’ PPE that the country used to import. “We used to buy all these things but because of Education 5.0 we are now a country which is focusing on manufacturing. If a country does not manufacture its own things, it shows that the education offered in that country is not helpful. The main purpose of Education 5.0 is that education must not be theory only but must be seen through its fruits,” said Prof Murwira. “Education must be seen through the revival of industries. Education must be seen through provision of services. Since the launch of Education 5.0 which replaced the education system that we inherited from the colonial era, which promoted people to learn to read write but not learning about the country and how to use natural resources for the benefit of the people, we must add two things which we call innovation and industrialisation.” — @nqotshili