The Chronicle Business Reporter
FIRST Mutual Funeral Services, a member of First Mutual Holdings Limited has spread its wings to Bulawayo as part of its nationwide expansion drive. First Mutual Funeral Services is located at First Mutual Building, corner 9th Avenue and Joshua M. Nkomo Street. “The funeral services business, launched in 2019, is expanding its branch network and will now be providing services in Bulawayo and surrounding areas,” said the company in a press statement . “This move is meant to ensure that we provide affordable funeral services to our policy holders and walk-in clients in the greater Matabeleland Region.” As a business giant, First Mutual said it subscribes to excellence and strives to continue setting the highest standards in provision of funeral services and facilities to all its customers equivalent to that of a hero’s burial. “This resonates with the First Mutual group ethos of providing economic dignity to all,” it said. “Products and services on offer at First Mutual Funeral Services include a wide range of affordable coffins and caskets, state of the art hearses and removal ambulances, 65 seater buses, mortuary, body preparation, embalming, cremation and repatriation and expatriation services.” First Mutual Funeral Services also offers mobile chapels, a unique product feature that only First Mutual offers to the public. The mobile chapel concept brings the chapel to the family instead of families coming to First Mutual for body viewing and church service. “This is in line with the company’s quest for innovation and in observance of the Covid-19 restrictions,” said the company. “Our funeral directors/undertakers are available to handle logistics ensuring that the burial site is the correct size to accommodate the coffins as well as to assist with any regulatory paperwork as required for a burial.” For repatriation and expatriation, First Mutual said its unit works with renowned service providers in the region, and internationally, to bring back the remains of the dead. According to the company, the existing Funeral Cash Plan (FCP) and eFML policy holders have an option to access the services based on their policy value at the time of claiming. Funeral services are provided to both policy holders and non-policyholders. In instances where the sum assured is lower than the value of services chosen, the company said the policyholder is allowed to top up in cash. “If the sum assured is greater than the value of services rendered, the claimant will receive the balance in cash. Cash services are quoted based on our price list, which is subject to change periodically in line with prevailing market dynamics,” it said. “A funeral policy, which guarantees provision of services in the event of death will be launched soon.” First Mutual Funeral Services is a subsidiary of First Mutual Holdings Limited, a leading financial services group that is committed to creating value through risk management, wealth creation, and wealth management.