The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
HEALTH sector workers consist eight percent of the total number of people who have been infected with the Covid-19 in the country as Government warns of the second wave of infections. The statistics were derived from the Covid-19 daily report of last Friday where 8 257 people had tested positive from the virus with 7 771 recovering from the pandemic while 236 had succumbed to it. The majority of recorded cases are due to local transmissions. Cabinet noted that Covid-19 infections increased by 53 cases between week ending October 11 and the one ending October 18. Briefing the media during a post Cabinet briefing on Tuesday, Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa warned the public against being Covid-19 complacent. She said it was not true that Covid-19 virus does not spread under hot environments as has been wrongly been believed by members of the public. “New cases for week 42 stood at 158 reflecting an increase from 105 recorded in week 41. The total number of health workers infected is now 653. Cabinet wishes to dispel the myth (that the virus) is weak in warm temperatures and warns that the risks a second wave of Covid-19 infections if citizens become complacent in adhering to protective and preventive behaviour,” she said. Government’s warning comes as it is continuously easing lockdown regulations to balance between economic productivity and wellness of citizens. As part of the reopening of the economy, Cabinet approved the gradual reopening of borders with effect from December 1, a development which has excited a lot of travelers and traders. Commenting on the latest developments, acting Mpilo Central Hospital chief executive officer, Professor Solwayo Ngwenya said, the increase in Covid-19 cases was very worrying as the country had seemingly contained the spread of the virus. He warned that if figures continue to rise health workers are likely to be the worst affected by the virus. “This time around health workers are going to face the brunt of the virus because it is appearing to be changing form. It is mutating. Previously, it was associated with cold temperatures but even Cabinet has noted that the virus doesn’t care what the temperatures are like. It seems to thrive whether in cold or hot temperatures,” said Prof Ngwenya. He warned that the reopening of the economy should not be an excuse for members of the public to travel unnecessarily, exposing themselves and others to the virus. “The Government is trying to provide a breather to the economy that is why it is reopening borders and schools. But if people do not take prevention measures seriously, we are going to be forced to close down, sooner rather than later. “The virus is around and we cannot wish it away. I know when borders are said to be reopening and this has excited a lot of people, but when we do so we should guard against importing new strains of the virus.”-@nqotshili