The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
MOTIVATIONAL speaker and author, Njabulo Moyo is excited to be nominated in the Roil Bulawayo Arts Awards (RoilBAA) in the Outstanding Literary Work — Non-Fiction category saying this shows that hard work and consistency pay in the end. Moyo’s book, Self Starters is in the same category with top politicians Dr Obert Mpofu and Retired Colonel Tshinga Dube’s works. Dr Mpofu’s is On the Shoulders of Struggle and Rt Col Dube’s is Quiet Flows the Zambezi. Moyo said he was excited as he has worked hard behind the scenes. “I am super excited about the nomination. At times we work hard behind the scenes, motivating, publishing and mentoring upcoming writers with little or no recognition in the sense of awards. I guess like they say hard work and consistency pay. I’ve lost count of the number of book launches I have hosted, books I have edited including some that have won awards as well as people I’ve published under my company African Sketches Publishers. The future of writing is in safe hands as the country is endowed with great thinkers or should I say passionate creatives,” said Moyo. He said passion is what drives him to write books and the desire to tell stories that give birth to change in narratives and positive impacts. “While I’m not one to seek validation because I do believe in myself and my work has in the past produced positive societal impact, the nomination cements and confirms that there is space for people like me in the arts. People who were raised in the ghetto but have managed to rise beyond the social stereotypes. It means that the brand Njabulo Moyo is relevant and there is more to be done,” said Moyo. Inspired by Nigerian legend, Chinua Achebe and fellow Zimbabwean Philani Amadeus Nyoni, Moyo said because he was a self-taught person, he wanted the book to inspire others. “The idea behind the book is to inspire others to find their inner strength. Most of us wait for endorsements, want people to fund our dreams and are always focusing on what we don’t have instead of investing in what we can do. Self Starters alludes to a group of people who understand the value of starting initiatives, learning along the way and living a life driven by risk-taking. To me this enables one to die empty,” said Moyo. He said he has faced challenges but in the long run he has overcome them. “I faced the challenge of breaking into the international community in terms of sales. However, this is becoming a thing of the past as I have received an increase in sales from the international community with a lot of positive feedback that has propelled me to work on my eighth book due for release early next year,” said Moyo. The Bulawayo-based author has written seven books including Motivating the inner soul, African Sketches, Sketches form My Soul and Ubuntugogy the heart of civic leadership which was written in three days and launched in South Africa during his Young African Leaders fellowship. He is set to release his latest offering Toxic Ties before year end and hosts a web-based family time show Moments with Njabulo Moyo that profiles individuals with stories that inspire change. The show is produced by CnC Productions. — Follow on Twitter @bonganinkunzi.