The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
THE Covid-19 pandemic has heightened tensions between major powers and this requires astute diplomats to proffer ways and strategies to prevent the rising tensions from escalating. This was said by Zimbabwe’s Ambassador to Mozambique, Douglas Nyikayaramba last Thursday while officially opening the Defence attachés association meeting held in the neighbouring country. He said it was imperative for the military diplomats to understand that diplomacy needs a set of skills that matter in many areas of daily life. “Diplomacy involves an understanding of many facets of human nature that can undermine agreement and stoke conflict and indeed a commitment to unpacking these with foresight and grace. “As you meet today, to exchange views, experiences and information in your association, we need to be mindful of the Covid-19 pandemic which has indeed changed the world dramatically. It has moved faster than wars or ideological fights,” said Ambassador Nyikayaramba. He said the virus poses the greatest risk to the most vulnerable, those living in poverty and people living with disabilities and pre-existing conditions. The diplomat said the pandemic had been fast moving and had defied many predictions. Ambassador Nyikayaramba said apart from Covid-19, there were numerous conflicts and simmering conflicts underway in the world which need to be dealt with to avoid unnecessary escalation of the situation. “I hope that as diplomats, as you discuss you will be able to exchange notes, information and perhaps the best ways to resolve the various issues in different regions to avoid far implications of some of these conflicts. “You may want to appreciate Zimbabwe’s involvement in helping to restore peace in the region and continent at large. The country has played a major role in Somalia, Liberia, South Sudan, Cote D’Ivoire, Eritrea, Kosovo, East Timor, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Mozambique civil war, DRC and Angola where its security services have been deployed,” said the Ambassador. He said among others, the Zimbabwe Defence forces commander, General Phillip Valerio Sibanda and Major General (Rtd) Mike Nyambuya had excelled in various peacekeeping, observers, reconciliation and contingents missions globally. Ambassador Nyikayaramba said under the leadership of President Mnangagwa the country had experienced a major transformation of its political and economic environment. “It is prudent for me to reiterate my country’s commitment to re-engagement and engagement policy. The new dawn, under President Mnangagwa, has brought renewed confidence, hope and energised our people to work for sustainable development of the country. “Zimbabwe is open for business, is a call by the President to investors and traders or business entities, both local and international, to take up abundant opportunities in the country,” said Ambassador Nyikayaramba.