The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
GOVERNMENT has disbursed another tranche of $2,9 million in devolution funds to the Beitbridge Rural District Council (BBRDC) as it presses ahead with infrastructure and economic development from grassroots to national level. So far, the local authority has received a cumulative $8,5 million from Government under the initiative. Before the latest allocation, the council received $5,6 million, which was used to build Novhe Primary School (Ward 10), Tshabili (Ward 2), and Dumba (Ward 15) Clinics and repairing of infrastructure at Shashe clinic, primary and secondary schools (affected by torrential rains). BBRDC acting chief executive officer, Mr Peter Ncube said the devolution funds had contributed to boosting infrastructure development in the area. “We have received another tranche of $2,9 million in devolution funds from the Government and we have committed the money to fund three major infrastructure development as part of improving service delivery. “These projects including the roofing of classroom blocks at Tshabeta Primary School in Ward 11. The roof was blown off by strong winds during the last rainy season,” he said. Mr Ncube said they will use some of the funds to complete the construction of staff cottages at Dumba Clinic (Ward 15) and at Novhe Primary School (Ward 10). He said all these were new projects constructed from a previous allocation under the same devolution concept. The official said they had also procured ancillary accessories required by the Zimbabwe Electricity Supply Authority (Zesa) to reconnect power at the Shashe clinic in Ward 8. “Shashe clinic had its power supply system adversely affected by heavy winds in the last rain season and we have used part of the latest devolution funds to reconnect it on the Zesa grid. “As we speak our engineer is on the ground ensuring that normal services are restored in that community,” said Mr Ncube. He said besides getting devolution funds the local authority was busy rehabilitating roads that had succumbed to wear and tear. The official said in the last quarter they worked on the Nottingham to Bishopstone (Ward 14), Madaulo to Matibe (Ward 3), and the Mazunga to Zhovhe (Ward 14) roads. Mr Ncube said currently they were servicing their broken-down grader so that they may resuscitate the badly damaged Kwalu to Wilier Road (Ward 11).