The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
PROMINENT businessman, Mr Raj Modi, has opened a new retail outlet in Bulawayo, which has created 120 jobs. The supermarket is called ‘Sai Mart Lobengula Street’ and is a sister unit to The Wholesale Centre Liquor Hub, which is also owned by the Modi family. Mr Modi, who is also the Deputy Minister of Industry and Commerce, is one of the most successful entrepreneurs and philanthropists in the city. The new business entity is situated down town along Lobengula Street near the Zimbabwe United Passenger Company (Zupco) bus terminus. It opened its doors to the public over the weekend ahead of the official launch sometime next month. “The whole idea in my mind when I opened that supermarket (Sai Mart Lobengula Street) was to create employment,” said Mr Modi in an interview with Business Chronicle yesterday. “We are employing about 120 people all in all at the supermarket.” The Deputy Minister, who is also Zanu-PF legislator for Bulawayo South constituency, said plans were underway to officially open the outlet in a few weeks’ time. “We are just waiting for some few things that need to be finished before we launch the supermarket. “Some of the minor things that need to be sorted out while we are doing business include plumbing and some electrical installations,” he said. “We cannot use some of the equipment at the supermarket because of the power supply and things like that. So, we are putting up solar power so that the whole thing can run on solar.” Mr Modi said plans to roll out more retail outlets across the city were in the pipeline and this will be implemented next year. In 2017, Sai Enterprises announced that it was constructing a US$12 million shopping complex in Bulawayo’s high-density suburb of Cowdray Park. The construction of the mall was expected to be completed in 2018 but has missed the deadline owing to funding challenges. Commenting on the project, Mr Modi said: “At the moment construction of the shopping mall is on hold because of the current financial challenges. “Hopefully, next year we will resume construction, which is 60 percent complete right now,” he said. Once complete, the shopping complex will comprise a main supermarket, over 40 shops, banking halls, a medical service centre, fast foods outlets and parking bays. — @okazunga.