The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Acting Sports Editor
PREPARATIONS for one of Africa’s top marathon events, the Econet Victoria Falls marathon set to be virtually held on December 13, are gathering pace with the organisers roping in renowned race tracker SportSplits. The race will be virtually held due to movement restrictions imposed as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic. The popular event, which draws thousands of local and international participants, traditionally takes place during the first week of July, but was postponed to December 13 following national lockdowns across the world as Governments battled to contain the outbreak of Covid-19. Econet said despite travel restrictions and social distancing measures now observed globally, this year athletes will still be able to participate in the marathon virtually, by simply registering and running the marathon from any country in the world. “We couldn’t hold the event physically in July and we have now decided to hold it virtually through a world renowned App called SportSplits. Participants can run from anywhere across the world,” the company said. Now considered among Africa’s top marathons, the event comprises a full marathon of 42km, a 21km half-marathon and the popular 7,5km fun run. Last year the event attracted more than 3 500 participants from 60 countries across the world. “We are encouraging participants to register, practice and track their activities with the SportSplits App so that they are ready for the competition in three months’ time,” organisers of the event said, adding that 10 percent of the proceeds from the marathon will once again be donated towards wildlife conservation. In a virtual marathon, athletes register and pay the requisite fee for their preferred distance and run the marathon on the set date (December 13) along their own chosen route within a specified time. The athletes record the finishing time and upload it on the race website and get certificates of participation which they can print out. Once one registers for the race, they will access an interactive real-time tracking software available to runners. Those that register for the competition can start using the tracking system during their preparations for the event. Last year Christopher Gondwe won the men’s competition in a time of 2 hours, 25,36 minutes followed by Costem Chiyaba a split eight seconds later while Lyno Muchena settled for third place, four seconds behind Chiyaba. In the women’s race, Felistus Chitoshi romped home first in 2 hours, 52,31 minutes, followed by Chokore Chiyedza in 2 hours, 58,12 minutes while veteran road queen Tabitha Tsatsa was third in 3 hours, 06,06 minutes.