The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
ANGLO-American-owned local unit, Unki Platinum Mine, has increased production by 14 percent to 27 000 ounces (oz) in the third quarter ended September 30, 2020. The mining group, however, says its total Platinum Group Metals (PGM) production of 1 112 900oz decreased two percent against the prior year largely due to lower production predominantly from the joint operations of Modikwa and Kroondal, as well as lower production from Amandebult, all in South Africa. This, the platinum miner said, was largely offset by strong production performance from Unki, Mogalakwena and Mototolo, who increased production 12 percent, nine percent and six percent respectively. “Unki PGM production increased 12 percent to 60 000oz (platinum production increased by 14 percent to 27 000oz and palladium production increased by 10 percent to 23 600oz),” said Anglo in a latest update. While Covid-19 has continued to impact the business, the mining group said own-managed operations reached 94 percent of normal capacity by the end of the quarter. Own-managed mines PGM production increased by one percent to 652 000oz despite the continued impact of Covid-19. “Mogalakwena, Unki and Mototolo delivered strong performances. Joint operations PGM production (mined and purchase of concentrate) decreased by 23 percent to 190 600oz largely due to the impact of Covid-19 and the safety stoppage at Modikwa. Refined PGM production — owned decreased by 14 percent to 1 020 700oz,” said Anglo. It said the lower output was principally due to interruptions at the Anglo Converter Plant (ACP), which was offset marginally by increased throughput. PGM sales volumes from production decreased 16 percent to 884 900oz due to lower refined production, and the rebuild of refined inventory. Anglo-American Platinum chief executive officer, Ms Natascha Viljoen, was quoted saying: “From a production perspective, we have managed to reach 94 percent of normal capacity by the end of the quarter from our own-managed mines, with Mogalakwena, Unki and Mototolo delivering strong performances. “Refined production continues to be interrupted by water leaks at the Anglo Converter Plant’s Phase B unit. We have put increased monitoring in place at the Phase B unit to ensure an ongoing safe operating environment for our employees and will continue to take all appropriate measures to keep people safe while we wait for the main Phase A unit to restart.” She said her organisation has made significant progress with the Phase A unit and remains on track to commission it before the end of the year. — @okazunga