The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
South Africa-based DJ Zandi Maz has worked with Kalawa Jazmee house vocalist Nokwazi in a love song, Emathandweni which is already getting rave reviews from listeners. The soulful Amapiano track, has Nokwazi, the Inde hitmaker, laying her beautiful moving voice over a soothing beat that is set to be one for the festive season. The song is officially being released this Friday alongside its video, though radio stations in Zimbabwe and Mzansi have been playing it since Friday. DJ Zandi Maz, real name Zandile Mazithulela, said the song was about the love life of a female artiste. “The song is about love. It’s called Emathandweni. It’s about the life of a typical woman who works in the entertainment industry. She works at night and this is classified as a bit abnormal for women to leave her man at home while she goes to work at night. It’s an assurance by her that she’s in love with the man in her life,” said Zandi Maz. She said it has been her desire to work with artistes such as Nokwazi ever since she started being on the decks. “Ever since I started my Deejaying about eight years ago I always had my favourite stars that I wanted to work with. Nokwazi was actually one of the first people I wanted to work with. At first it was so far-fetched but I got to meet up with Nokwazi when I was working with Busiswa,” said Zandi Maz. She said working with Nokwazi was one of her most enjoyable experiences. “When I decided to release a single, I did a beat with the help of Mr Brown (songwriter and producer who has worked with Master KG, Nomcebo Zikode and Makhadzi) who is doing great in the industry. I gave Nokwazi a call this year and we got into studio and everything went smoothly. Nokwazi is such a joy to work with; she abounds in energy. She said to me I should tell her how I want her to express the song. I wrote the lyrics and she laid the voice and the rest in history,” said Zandi Maz. Fans should expect the video of the song to be premièred on international music channels, MTv Base, Channel O and Trace. The Esigodini-born DJ has played alongside South Africa’s Busiswa, Trademark, DJ Pepsi, Maphorisa and Uhuru among other Mzansi artistes.- Follow on Twitter @bonganinkunzi