The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo I don’t quite have the empirical evidence but I’m inclined to believe my feet grew a size bigger during pregnancy. I think they grew because most of my shoes wouldn’t fit months after delivery! It’s been a cool 20 months of mummyhood and I’m out here looking for size six pairs of shoes! It used to bother me quite a bit because my feet looked much bigger than they should. I thought they didn’t match my height — if at all that makes any sense. As a result, I’ve been avoiding open shoes. I’ve mostly stuck to pumps and Chucks but the rising temperatures of late won’t let me live! I was out shopping for sandals the other day when the “big foot” insecurity kicked in. I asked to try on different styles because I just wasn’t getting satisfaction from sandals with a strap across the toes and round the ankle only. My feet were glaring and I hated it until I had an epiphany. What if I tried on something with a strap that cuts across my foot — from the toes right through to the ankle and voila, it worked a charm! I immediately started to feel better about my feet because they didn’t look so big anymore. I realise I’m probably not the only one who has been through this. It was a reminder that there really are quite a number of things to consider when shopping for shoes, sandals specifically. For example, ask yourself what you need the sandals for. Are they for spending time at the pool or are they an office wardrobe replacement for your winter ankle boots? Like flats or heels, sandals can be worn on a variety of different occasions and paired with numerous outfits, so when looking for sandals it’s first important to note what you need them for. That way, when you move onto the next questions, you’ll be able to narrow your selections quickly and effectively. When you know what the sandals are for, consider the heel height. Higher heels often mean the sandals are a little more formal, great for wearing to a more casual office or out on warm summer evenings. On the other hand, flat sandals are a perfect shoe for your more casual warm weather needs, like running errands, going shopping and anything else you have going on. Wedge and stacked heels are good for casual and daytime events. But if you’re looking for sandals to wear to a formal function, try a pair with thinner heels. Closed-toe sandals are a combination of flats and sandals. The closed toe part can make the shoe look more work-appropriate, while the open sides are perfect for the season. You can pair closed-toe sandals with a pencil skirt or show them off with cropped slim pants and a blazer at the office. These shoes can also transition easily to casual environments like after-work drinks with co-workers or a Saturday barbecue with friends. If you’re planning on wearing these sandals for more than just an hour or two, it’s important that they’re supportive and secure to keep your feet comfortable all day. Look for styles with arch support, adjustable straps that keep your feet completely secure, and a big enough sole that your toes or heels aren’t hanging off the end. It obviously will boil down to your preferences but rather than flip-flop or slip-on styles, opt for a pair with a sling back or ankle strap that will keep the shoes on your feet without any effort. Shoes are a great way to have fun with your style, but sandals can be especially exciting. After all, there are tons of styles to choose from! Look for sandals that speak to your personality. Don’t be afraid to opt for interesting embellishments, like medallions and cool patterns. You should always try on the sandals before purchasing them as sizes can vary between brands or even style. Another rule of thumb is making sure your feet are well groomed whenever you decide to wear sandals. This doesn’t necessarily mean painting your toe nails or getting stick on’s. It simply means making sure your toe nails are short, your feet are clean, your heels are scrubbed and you’re well moisturised. It really goes a long way in giving you a polished look. A friend of mine would always say whenever he met a new girl, he’d look at her feet first. The state of her feet would give insight into what kind of a person she was and how “clean” she was in general. Don’t say I didn’t give you the heads up! Until next week, flaunt your pattern and style and don’t forget to catch up with me on Twitter handle @PatternStyleZw or WhatsApp +263774492700.