The Chronicle Business Reporter
THE Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Finance and Economic Development will next week begin nationwide public consultations on the 2021 national budget with most engagement set to be conducted virtually due to Covid-19 pandemic. Finance and Economic Development Minister Professor Mthuli Ncube is expected to present the upcoming fiscal policy statement in November. The consultations will start on October 12, according to a schedule issued by the Parliament of Zimbabwe. Due to the need to observe Covid-19 pandemic health guidelines, the August House said some of the hearings will be conducted virtually and where the hearings would be conducted physically, not more than 100 people will be allowed at the venues. “The Committee on Budget, Finance and Economic Development and members of the Expanded Sustainable Development Goals Committee will hold public hearings on the 2021 national budget consultations from the 12th to the 16th of October 2020. The teams will cover various places in Zimbabwe,” reads part of the public notice. In Bulawayo the public hearings will be held at Selbourne Hotel on October 12 while in Matabeleland North province, teams conducting the hearings will be at Hwange Colliery Club in Hwange as well as Tatazela Hall in Inyathi on October 13 and 14, respectively. In Matabeleland South, the public hearings will be held in Plumtree at Plumtree TMB Hall on October 15 and the following day at Colleen Bawn Community Hall in Colleen Bawn. All the physical meetings will be held from 10.30AM to 12.30PM. “The public hearings will at all times comply with the Ministry of Health and Child Care Covid-19 regulations as outlined in Statutory Instruments 99 and 110 regarding the observing of social distancing, sanitisation, temperature screening and wearing of facial masks,” said Parliament. “Only 100 participants will be allowed at any one time; where more than 100 participants want to attend, they will only be allowed in groups that comply with the requirements.” In the Midlands, the public hearings will be held at Gokwe Business Centre on October 14 in Gokwe and Mberengwa Education Centre in Mberengwa the following day. On October 16, the team will also be in Shurugwi at LID Agency Training Centre (Chachacha). All participants must be wearing facial masks and appropriate social distancing will be observed. “All members of the public are urged to observe these requirements which will be monitored by the Ministry of Health and Child Care teams.” Radio stations such as Diamond FM in Mutare as well as Power FM will host the public hearings virtually on October 13 and 14 respectively from 7PM to 8PM. Khulumani FM in Bulawayo and Hevoi FM in Masvingo will also host the public consultations through the virtual platform on October 15 from 7PM to 8PM.