The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
YOUNG filmmakers in Zimbabwe are set to benefit from a fellowship programme recently launched by Accountability Lab Zimbabwe and Magamba Network that seeks to identify and nurture talent. The initiative took off on Friday with the coordinators saying they are now accepting entries from young and emerging Zimbabwean filmmakers. Project officer of the fellowship, Dexter Fundire said the programme presented learning opportunities aimed at developing the next generation of impact filmmakers. “It’ll give young people aged 18-35 an opportunity to gain skills in filmmaking and storytelling, and broaden their understanding of integrity and accountability,” he said. Fundire added that under the initiative, the participants will learn how to work in both film production and post-production roles. Young people in Zimbabwe, he said face multiple intersectional challenges, including limited opportunities to use their creative voice for positive civic engagement. According to the official, the programme leverages young people’s interest in digital media and the arts towards creating constructive dialogue and challenging social norms. “We are especially interested in recruiting young women and persons who are differently-abled. This is an opportunity for those perspectives on accountability and governance to be seen and heard. “The ideal candidate for this opportunity is conscious of social accountability issues in their communities, and wants to tell stories to challenge our society to make a change,” said Fundire. He said the young people will receive training in social justice and accountability, scriptwriting, cinematography, editing, impact filmmaking, and marketing and distribution. They will also be mentored and coached by industry experts. Fundire added the fellows will be required to make at least one short film/documentary, and will have a chance to work on other film projects on associated Accountability Lab Zimbabwe work. “They’ll also be supported with basic equipment and editing tools as well as the necessary support to access and use the internet, travel to and from fellowship activities and events,” said the project officer. The fellowship is part of the Arts4Change component of the New Narratives for Accountability in Zimbabwe (NNAZ) Project, a joint initiative of Accountability Lab Zimbabwe, Magamba Network, and Kubatana Trust of Zimbabwe. The Arts4Change component of the NNAZ project focuses on the use of creative activism especially through music, film, and comedy to promote dialogue on social justice, accountability, and integrity.