The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
THE illegal sanctions imposed on the country are affecting the country’s risk perception resulting in international financial institutions being reluctant to extend loans to Zimbabwe thereby hampering economic growth, Zanu-PF Namibia District has said. The ruling party’s district has called for the removal of the illegal sanctions arguing that they are hurting the economy and lives of ordinary citizens. The district joins the country, Sadc, AU and other progressive international institutions and organisations in calling for the removal of the embargo. Sadc declared October 25 as the day to lobby and demonstrate against illegal sanctions imposed on Zimbabwe. This year’s anti-sanctions commemorations are running under the theme: “resilience, progress, solidarity under an environment of sanctions.” Zanu-PF Namibia District chairperson Cde Mahwani Kangausaru said Sadc economies have been seriously affected by sanctions on Zimbabwe. He said Government through the re-engagement policy has committed to addressing some of the concerns raised by the international community. Cde Kangausaru said it was time for Zimbabwe to be given a chance to run a prosperous economy without impediments. “We recognise the impact the sanctions have created on the financial sector in Zimbabwe. The resultant effect has negatively restricted financial support to Zimbabwe thereby hindering economic recovery. Zimbabwe fought a protracted guerrilla war against Rhodesia. The causes for the war were the land question and socio-economic imbalances, amongst others,” said Cde Kangausaru. “The Government led by His Excellency Comrade Emmerson Mnangagwa has adopted a policy of re-engagement with international community. It started compensating former white farmers for developments on repossessed land and has opened up democratic space,” he said. Cde Kangausaru said with efforts being undertaken by Government it will only be fair for the West to remove the sanctions. “Given the above mentioned, continued imposition of sanctions against Zimbabwe is unwarranted and misdirected. We, as Zanu-PF Namibia joins the rest of the world in calling for the removal of all forms of sanctions imposed on Zimbabwe. The benefits of the removal of sanctions are many for the country and includes among others international co-operation, socio-economic recovery, political and economic stability,” said Cde Kangausaru. He said Zanu-PF Namibia District, was humbled by unanimous support and call for the unconditional removal of sanctions by Sadc, African Union, and all progressive people of the world and organisations and institutions. In solidarity with Zimbabwe, Sadc executive secretary Dr Stergomena Lawrence Tax said there is no justification for illegal sanctions to be imposed on Zimbabwe. Dr Tax said the sanctions have become a thorn not just for Zimbabwe but the region as whole. “Zimbabwe would have achieved more, if not constrained by the imposed sanctions. In line with the Sadc anti-sanctions stance, sanctions must be lifted now and there is no justification for their continuation at all. I call upon everyone, individuals, nationals, private sector entities as well as regional and international organisations to continue working with, and supporting Zimbabwe. I encourage all the people of Africa and beyond to stand against the embargo. Zimbabweans deserve better, so does every other African,” she said. — @nqotshili