The Chronicle Joel Tsvakwi, Leisure Correspondent
The late Oliver “Tuku” Mtukudzi may be gone but his music legacy is definitely in very safe hands as his nephew, Simbarashe Mtukudzi is holding the fort. The Bulawayo-based Afro-Jazz musician who is the leader of Black Elephants band has taken after his late uncle who had a passion to groom up-and-coming talent. Simbarashe does not have a studio or arts centre like Tuku’s Pakare Paye in Norton but this has not stopped him from helping aspiring Afro-Jazz artistes in and around Bulawayo. The young lad who is a versatile artiste and lead guitarist, has also proved without doubt that music runs in his blood as he is churning out quality music. Simbarashe, who is the son of Tuku’s young brother, gained popularity earlier this year after he featured Jeys Marabini on a single titled Todzosa Tuku. Tuku’s death dealt him a major blow as he had hoped to feature him on his debut album. “We had been in talks with the old man and he had agreed to fine-tune my work at Pakare Paye Studios because he also wanted to spice it with his voice and some Dande tunes. However, that could not be as nature took its course.” But this has not stopped him as he is assembling a team for a gospel single titled Ndauya Mwari. “I’m working on a single that’s expected to be released in November. This song titled Ndauya Mwari is meant to inspire the young artistes as well as Black Elephant. While working on this single, I’ve managed to train young girls from AFM church’s Living Word Praise and Worship whom I featured. We also managed to rope in the services of seasoned voice trainer and vocalist Washington Rabson of the famous Mai vaDhikondo track who will be playing the saxophone,” he said. Mtukudzi said he drew inspiration from his Dande rural home, a place he believes has been influential in shaping his music just like his late uncle. He thanked fans for the support they have given him. “I’d like to thank my fans for supporting the Black Elephant Music which is receiving airplay on most local radio stations like National FM, Radio Zimbabwe, ZiFM Stereo and Skyz Metro FM,” he said. – @joelTsvakwi.