The Chronicle Gibson Mhaka, Senior Reporter
INFORMATION and Communication Technologies (ICTs) are key in the attainment of President Mnangagwa’s vision for an upper middle-income economy by 2030. This was said by Information Communication Technology, Postal and Courier Services Minister Dr Jenfan Muswere during the commissioning of Silonkwe Base Station in Kezi yesterday. Dr Muswere said his ministry’s resolve to improve mobile accessibility was strengthened by the visionary leadership of President Mnangagwa. “The world is being driven by innovation and as such ICTs have become key fundamentals in the attainment of Zimbabwe’s Vision 2030 of becoming an upper middle-income economy. As the Ministry of ICT, Postal and Courier Services, our mandate is to ensure the access and utilisation of information communication technologies to improve the livelihoods of all Zimbabweans, irrespective of location, throughout our great nation,” said Dr Muswere. He said the Silonkwe Base Station which was constructed by NetOne was going to revolutionalise business, agriculture and enhance communication within the province and beyond adding that improved access to ICTs will not only promote growth and development within the constituencies but will also have spill-over benefits on the overall growth and development of Zimbabwe. “I acknowledge the sterling efforts of NetOne, as it continues to expand its network footprint and increase access to service provision in previously marginalised areas. Silonkwe Base Station is strategically located and it is part of NetOne’s thrust to fulfill the Government’s initiative to provide coverage and digital exposure to originally marginalised rural populations. “This will no doubt promote employment creation, by enhancing distribution and access channels,” said Dr Muswere. He added that Silonkwe Base Station will improve access to ICTs for seven rural schools within the area capacitating them for e-learning and plugging the digital gap as the country embraces the digital economy. He however, urged the community to safeguard the infrastructure by ensuring that it was not going to be vandalised. In a speech read on her behalf by acting chief technology officer Raphael Mushanawani, NetOne acting chief executive officer, Chipo Jaisson said the base station was not only a source of communication but an additional source of employment and income for many in the district. “Silonkwe Base Station will empower the community through access to communication solutions as well as products and services offered by NetOne. “Our promise to serve you does not stop on our product offering alone. “As NetOne we are committed to transforming livelihoods through rolling out impactful corporate social responsibility initiatives,” she said. Postal and Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe (Potraz) Director-General Dr Gift Machengete hailed the construction of the Silonkwe Base Station saying it resonates very well with the country’s Vision 2030. He also urged the country’s three mobile network to share infrastructure saying it significantly reduces capital expenditure and operating costs.