The Chronicle PREMIER League clubs have “unanimously agreed” that ‘Project Big Picture’ will not be “endorsed or pursued”. The controversial plans, proposed by Liverpool and Manchester United, were rejected at a meeting of the 20 clubs in England’s top flight on Wednesday. Instead, all clubs agreed to “work together” on a new “strategic plan” for the “financing of English football”. The clubs also decided on a £50m rescue package for League One and Two clubs at the meeting. A Premier League statement said “discussions will also continue with the EFL” over financial support for the Championship. ‘Project Big Picture’ involved reducing the Premier League from 20 to 18 clubs and scrapping the EFL Cup and Community Shield. In addition, the English Football League would have got 25% of all future TV deals, which would have been negotiated jointly, plus a £250m bail-out. However, it would also have seen more power transferred to the so-called ‘big six’ Premier League clubs. In its statement, the Premier League said its members had “agreed to work together as a 20-club collective on a strategic plan for the future structures and financing of English football, consulting with all stakeholders to ensure a vibrant, competitive and sustainable football pyramid”. It added: “Clubs will work collaboratively, in an open and transparent process, focusing on competition structure, calendar, governance and financial sustainability. “This project has the full support of the FA and will include engagement with all relevant stakeholders including fans, government and, of course, the EFL.” “Clearly there’s some frustration that a proposal that hadn’t had the input from the clubs has been pushed so hard in public,” said Premier League chief executive Richard Masters. “We don’t have any beef with the EFL. We have a historic relationship – we want that to be constructive. “It was a candid, positive and – in the end – a unanimous meeting. “We decided to move on from ‘Big Picture’ and move on to a new review process. “Solidarity is incredibly strong so while there’s been a lot said, I don’t think it’s irreparably damaged the Premier League.” FA chairman Greg Clarke had said a breakaway league was suggested “as a threat” by the organisers of ‘Project Big Picture’. Masters added: “I don’t think anyone has been talking about breaking away. “We acknowledge the English model is a huge success but it hasn’t been reviewed for a long time, so maybe there are some systemic issues that haven’t been dealt with.” The Premier League said the financial package for League One and Two clubs was intended to make sure they “will not go out of business as a result of the financial impact of Covid-19 and be able to complete the 2020-21 season”. It conceded they were at more risk than Premier League and Championship clubs as they “rely more heavily on matchday revenue and have fewer resources at their disposal”. “This offer will consist of grants and interest-free loans totalling a further £50m on top of the £27.2m solidarity payments already advanced to League One and League Two this year, making a total of £77.2m,” added the Premier League statement. Culture Secretary Oliver Dowden, who described ‘Project Big Picture’ as ‘Project Power Grab’, has previously called on the Premier League to look after those lower down the football pyramid. “This morning I reiterated calls of many in the football family for bigger clubs to look after smaller clubs,” he said. “An offer has been made by the Premier League to EFL League One and Two which is a good start. “I urge them to work together and stay focused on helping clubs through this crisis.”