The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Acting Sports Editor
IN a bid to curb, among other ills in the game, illegal trafficking of young and talented players from Africa by powerful nations, Caf has entered into a partnership with International Centre for Sport Security (ICSS), which also aims at enhancing safety, security, integrity, and youth empowerment programs within African football. The agreement was signed in Rabat, Morocco, last week in which Caf president Ahmad Ahmad represented the confederation in what will see the two organisations work together to develop training programs and to ensure the highest level of safety and security within the Caf member associations. Among the projects set to be undertaken by the two organisations are training programmes aimed at educating security officers, supporting the growth of a professional network of security personnel in Africa and continuing to develop the security operations through joint programmes within football federations, leagues, clubs, academies and other stakeholders including those operating at the grass-roots levels. “Caf is a values-driven organisation connecting players and communities across Africa. Good governance and safety are key pillars of Caf transformation plan. Security and integrity are top priorities for us, and a basic requirement for any football match to take place. I particularly take to heart the issue of young players. Young athletes are not commodities. They are human beings and must be treated as such. We are proud to be a leading voice in the drive to protect, promote and safeguard football and its fans. We look forward to a fruitful collaboration with ICSS,” said Ahmad. Football has the unique ability to inspire young and old people alike and as such Caf wishes to make it a powerful educational tool for the youth, openness to others and their differences as well as a powerful platform for building safe relationships between individuals and communities in order to promote peace, good values and health, especially among young people who are most at risk. “On behalf of the ICSS, I would like to thank President Ahmad and Caf for its commitment to safeguarding football in Africa (the fastest growing and most diverse football regions in the world) and can’t wait to advancing efforts with them to address the very real challenges football now faces to its security and credibility. For instance, not enough being done to stop trafficking of young African players. As an international organisation working to protect sport, ICSS is committed to protecting young players and raising awareness about the growing issue of child trafficking in football. With CAF, we believe that members and Governments could be doing more to protect potential stars of the future.” Mohammed HANZAB, ICSS chairman said. Speaking at the same occasion, ICSS chief executive officer Massimiliano Montanari said they were keen to initiate the cooperation with Caf and “will work together to protect the African football and its capacity to promote economic growth and shared values”.