The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Cal Vin’s life will be celebrated through a road show in Bulawayo that has been dubbed the Eita Zikhuphani Tour. The tour will see the late rapper’s body being taken around the city’s high-density suburbs on Saturday. The Eita Zikhuphani Tour procession will start at midday on Saturday at FSG Funeral parlour (corner 14th Avenue and George Silundika) then proceed to Makokoba, Mzilikazi, Nketa, Nkulumane, Old Magwegwe, Emakhandeni and then end at Luveve 5 shops called KoMpofu. At the shops, a prayer session will be held before the procession goes back to the city at FSG Funeral parlour where Cal Vin’s body will lie in state for the burial the next day. The burial place will be announced in due course. Before his burial, a funeral service will be held at the Amphitheatre, a venue that he performed at on several occasions, sharing the stage with South Africa’s KO and Winky D in 2017. Saimon Mambazo Phiri, who is part of the organising team for the Eita Zikhuphani Tour, said this will set a precedence on how artistes should be celebrated in the country. “It’s an example for young artistes on how they should be celebrated when they die. It has set a precedence for us as artistes that we should celebrate each other when we are alive and when we die,” said Mambazo. He was motivated by the unity that artistes from Zimbabwe and the community showed during Cal Vin’s funeral wake. “The unity among artistes and the community of Bulawayo and Zimbabwe in general has been amazing during this unfortunate time. It’s like when MaPecca died, people came together,” said Mambazo. The unity, Mambazo said showed Cal Vin’s character. “You might not have loved Cal Vin, but he stood for whatever he wanted. He was outspoken, unapologetic and thought provoking. His death has touched the young man on the street, the mothers in the neighbourhood and other members of society. It shows how in touch Cal Vin was with them,” said Mambazo.
— @bonganinkunzi