The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Hwange
Matabeleland North has implored Government to allocate of more funds to the health sector to improve access to primary healthcare and meet the provisions of the Abuja Declaration made in 2001. Speaking at a public hearing meeting on the upcoming national budget at Edmund Davis Hall in Hwange, a cross section of people from the province expressed concern on lack of adequate health facilities in the province where many people especially in rural areas walk for about 30km to the nearest clinic. They called for a deliberate policy compelling all ministries to contribute a certain percentage towards the Ministry of Health and Child Care to cushion the country’s health services, adding that the Covid-19 pandemic had caught the country unawares. The Government was urged to consider increasing budgetary allocation to health to about 15 percent as prescribed by the Abuja Declaration, where members of the African Union pledged to increase their health budget to at least 15 percent of the State’s annual budget. Zimbabwe’s annual budget allocation to the health sector has not risen beyond 10 percent over the years. Participants also implored Government to allocate funds to local pharmaceutical companies to be able to manufacture drugs and establish pharmacies in remote areas, training of more health workers, construction of health facilities, teaching of formerly marginalised languages, water infrastructure and road rehabilitation among others. Finance and Economic Development Minister Professor Mthuli Ncube is expected to present the 2021 fiscal policy statement next month. “Government should increase allocation to the Ministry of Health for improvement of facilities and training of nurses. We have high rates of teenage pregnancies and juvenile marriages which can be addressed by availing health funding for awareness and education on safe reproductive health,” said Mrs Danisa Mudimba, the programmes director for Basilwizi Trust operating in Binga and Hwange. Mr Gift Sibanda from Buwalo Matalikilo Trust urged Government to prioritise buying ambulances for all health centres. “Our budget should meet the Abuja Declaration and buy ambulances for all health centres. The Government should also set aside funds for alternative power sources at hospitals and opening of pharmacies in remote areas. We should also have a Covid-19 allowance for schools so as to ensure a Covid-19 free environment in our learning institutions,” said Mr Sibanda. Another participant concurred: “Government must support pharmaceutical companies and also consider pushing for partnerships with the private sector. “Our health budget last year was hardly 10 percent which is why we are saying Government should raise it to 15 percent so it can cover salaries, training of more health workers and health services provision.” Chief Siachilaba of Binga said citizens especially in remote areas walk long distances to the nearest clinic hence the need for allocation of funds to build more health facilities.–@ncubeleon