The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Health Reporter
A QUARTER of women between 20 to 24 years gave birth before they turned 18 in Zimbabwe with reports showing that the same age group accounts for 30 percent of new HIV infections. In a recently released 2020 report on addressing the needs of adolescent and young mothers affected by HIV, Unicef says young people are more likely to engage in risky sexual behaviours than older adults, making them vulnerable to HIV. The report says adolescent women also have less frequent contact with the healthcare system in general, including HIV prevention and treatment services which worsens their plight. In 2019, around a third of all new HIV infections in people above the age of 15 in Zimbabwe were among young people who are under the age of 24. According to Unicef, adolescent and young mothers have poorer maternal health and HIV outcomes as compared to older women. “Pregnancy and motherhood force girls and young women into adulthood, whether or not they are emotionally, cognitively or physically prepared. HIV infection adds another challenging dimension to their lives,” said Unicef. “One in four women aged 20-24 years gave birth before the age of 18, reflecting some of the highest adolescent pregnancy rates in the world. About 30 percent of new HIV infections occur among adolescent girls and young women (AGYW) aged 15-24 years.” Unicef said it is unlikely that global goals to eliminate HIV and Aids by 2030 and secure adolescent reproductive health and well-being will be reached unless these tailored services and support are provided. The organisation suggested that policy makers should prioritise the needs of adolescent and young mothers in national policies, plans, and essential health packages and commit resources to ensure implementation of relevant plans and packages at scale. Statistics from Avert — an HIV statistics organisation show that in 2019, there were
40 000 new HIV infections recorded in Zimbabwe down from 62 000 in 2010. Behaviour change communication, high treatment coverage and prevention of mother-to-child transmission are all thought to be responsible for this decline. Zimbabwe is making strong progress towards the Unaids 90-90-90 targets and as of 2019, 90 percent of people living with HIV in the country were aware of their status, and 94 percent of those diagnosed were on treatment. “Of the people diagnosed and on treatment, 86 percent are virally suppressed, meaning that they are likely to be in good health and pass HIV on to anyone else. Overall, this equates to 85 percent of all people living with HIV in Zimbabwe being on treatment and 73 percent of all HIV positive people being virally suppressed.” — @thamamoe