The Chronicle Langalakhe Mabena
South Africa-based gospel muso and business tycoon Canaan Nyathi of the Baba Ziveze fame is seeking to work with Bulawayo gospel artistes as a way of forging relations in spreading the Word of God. He is willing to do so by opening a subsidiary of his Canaan Nyathi Music company in the city which will be accessible to local musicians in helping them up the game in producing competitive music. The studio is set to be constructed in January as the lockdown slowed the project. Many talented up-and-coming artistes are failing to get proper studio time especially during the Covid-19 pandemic era. As such, just like his name Canaan implies, he is willing to take local singers to the “promised land” as instruments and up-to-date studio machinery will be installed for them. “I’ve strong relations with Bulawayo and I know the situation that artistes are facing, I’ve been in touch with a number of them including Mai Mwamuka and we’ve come up with strategies that will help artistes to spread the Word of God. “The first initiative is to establish a Canaan Nyathi Music stable that will be heavily furbished with latest technology advancements in producing music just like its mother stable here in Johannesburg. It’ll be accessible to local talented gospel artistes,” said Nyathi in a telephone interview from his base in Jozi. Nyathi said he has so much to give praise for in his life and he revealed that his smash hit Baba Ziveze which featured on his live DVD Another Level of Grace Upon Grace, is a testimonial song to his life. He said God has showed up in his life miraculously many times than he is able to count. The single which has charmed many including South Africa award-winning gospel muso Dumi Mkokstad and the legendary Pastor Benjamin Dube, has a potential to make him one of the favourite new faces to appear on the next Spirit of Praise project. In his career, Nyathi has performed alongside Ayanda Ntanzi, Dr Tumi, the late Neyi Zimu, Ntokozo Ngongoma, Dumi Mkokstad, Thina Zungu, to mention a few.