The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
IRKED by prevalence of housebreaking crimes, Victoria Falls residents have taken a leading role to revitalise the Neighbourhood Watch Committee (NWC) in an effort to fight criminal activity in the resort town. NWC is a community policing initiative where Zimbabwe Republic Police partners with members of the community who volunteer to police their neighbourhoods to prevent crime. The concept has not been getting maximum buy-in from residents in most parts of the country. However, attitudes are changing countrywide due to increased crime. In Hillside suburb and surroundings areas in Bulawayo, the NWC concept where residents work with police to curb crime, has proved successful. Residents in Emakhandeni suburb, where a 10-men gang recently stormed a house and damaged it at night, believe the incident would not have occurred if there had been a NWC. In Harare Waterfalls suburb, residents take turns to patrol the area at night. In Victoria Falls, residents in Mkhosana suburb’s BC847, BC848 and Smart Corner have formed committees and employed night watchmen in the wake of prevalence of unlawful entry and theft from motor vehicles crimes. Residents are also irked by noise from night house parties. BC846 residents have employed six NWC members who will be patrolling the area at night. Residents are happy the initiative will help reduce crime and protect property. “We started this on August 1 when we formed a committee. We then went door-to-door to create a database of all residents in BC847 and have also engaged six men who will be patrolling our neighbourhood. “We have 238 households and we resolved that each house should pay US$1 per month which will be used to pay the security personnel so that they are motivated. This is a residents’ initiative inspired by some criminal cases that have taken place in our area and we are doing this voluntarily to reduce crime,” said Mr Sisa Mthunzi, speaking at BC847 residents’ meeting, where he is secretary for the security committee. He said plans are underway to buy uniforms, torches, batons and also to get at least two dogs for use by the NWC members during patrols. BC847 and BC848 are new suburbs under Mkhosana high density and have no electricity and street lights. People use solar energy in their houses. Mr Mthunzi said residents are prepared to partner the Victoria Falls Municipality to install solar powered street lights in the suburb. A resident Ms Nosipho Bhebhe urged residents to fully support the initiative for safety and protection of property. Combined Victoria Falls Residents Association chair for Mkhosana chapter Mr Casper Mpofu commended residents’ efforts and called for inclusion of youths to build a sense of responsibility in them. “Smart Corner and BC848 residents have also come up with this initiative and its working as they also provide transport for the security personnel to do patrols. Let’s rope in youths to participate so that they have a sense of responsibility for their community. “Our town is not youth friendly because of lack of recreation and youth development hence a majority of crimes are committed by those between the ages of 18 and 35 so if we include them they will be occupied and desist from crime,” said Mr Mpofu. Matabeleland North police spokesperson Chief Inspector Siphiwe Makonese commended residents’ efforts. “We had challenges with house breaking, unlawful entry and theft of car parts hence we really appreciate efforts being done by residents. We want to thank them as we look forward to positive results when we work in partnership. “The NWC concept is still existing. We are happy residents have bought the idea and we want everyone to embrace it because it is about ownership and its goal is to curb crime,” said Chief Insp Makonese. Residents have also implored the council to erect speed humps along the BC847 road as vehicles reportedly speed along the road putting residents, especially children’s lives in danger. — @ncubeleon