The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
AMAPIANO Queen and BET Award-winning songstress Sha Sha will be in the city over the weekend to meet fans in Bulawayo as a way to say thank you for their support throughout her career. The Zimbabwean songstress in June walked away with the Viewer’s Choice Best New International Act at the prestigious 2020 BET awards. The South Africa based Sha Sha has been in the country as part of her thank you visit which has taken her to Harare where she did radio interviews and travelled to her home city Mutare and now Bulawayo. The last time Sha Sha was in Bulawayo was during the Bulawayo 2019 Shutdown gig at Queens Sports Club last year that featured, Nasty C, Mafikizolo, Nadia Nakai and Winky D. Sha Sha will make a guest appearance at BAC Leisure Centre tomorrow as from 6PM. This will coincide with BAC’s reopening according to a poster flying around on social media. Her manager Fungai Kush Zvirawa said Bulawayo was a very important city in Sha Sha’s career. “Sha Sha is in Zimbabwe as part of her thank you visit to the county. She is coming to Bulawayo to do the same as the city has really been behind her a lot with her music and all. So, people should keep their eyes open and perhaps they’ll catch a glimpse of her,” said Kush. Mduduzi Mdlongwa of 3D Events who are organising the meet and greet said all was set with limited tickets going on sale. “Fans should note that her appearance at BAC is just that, an appearance. She won’t be performing there, but this will be a way to afford a chance for her fans to meet her on the day,” said Mdlongwa. He said she will visit popular spots around the city. “We want to drive around with her in a convoy in Bulawayo, before she goes to Smoke House for a meal, then Hartsfield Tshisanyama and finally at BAC for her guest appearance,” said Mdlongwa. He said no mask no entry and Covid-19 regulations will be adhered to in the strictest manner. Sha Sha real name Charmaine Shamiso Mapambiro is an award-winning Zimbabwe Amapiano singer based in South Africa. Sha Sha was born and raised in Mutare, in eastern Zimbabwe. The songstress signed to DJ Maphorisa’s Blaqboy record label in 2018 has featured on several hits with Maphorisa and DJ Kabza de Small.- Follow on Twitter @bonganinkunzi