The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
MOSI-OA-TUNYA High School twins Nkosenhle and Nkosikhona Ncube of Victoria Falls are still shocked about being nominated in the Roil Bulawayo Arts Awards (RoilBAA) in the category Song of The Year. The orphaned twins whose stage name is Top Kings, are doing Form Five at Mosi-oa-Tunya High School and started music six years ago. After starting with Ndebele dancehall, Nkosenhle and Nkosikhona switched to afro fusion on the advice of their producer DJ Ace Kater who said they should be unique and craft their own genre and that seems to have paid dividends. They have named themselves Mr Culture and Mr Africa as they want to fuse African culture into their music. The twins have released two albums: Level Rachinja, a dancehall album done in 2017 and Ukufa Kuyabuya which they released last year. Amakhekhekhe is one of the many singles by the youthful duo and its video went viral on YouTube and Instagram where it is still trending with more than 21 000 views. Amakhekhekhe will be up against Amalobolo-Ngoma Ingoma, Asambeni-Mzoe 7, Babazala-Chipman, Like So-Asaph, Ngawuzw’Umoya Wami-Msiz’kay ft Awa Khiwe & Mzoe 7 and Thula Wazi-Vuyo Brown. The twins said they are excited by the nomination which puts Victoria Falls on the music map. “We didn’t know that people already know about this and that they love us this much. Many have been congratulating us on the streets. It feels like we have already won. This shows that Victoria Falls is growing in terms of music. We are humbled,” said Nkosenhle. The Top Kings are determined to go for the kill as they plan to mobilise fans for votes. “This is our first time to be recognised and we are very excited. It’s encouraging. We thank everyone here in Victoria Falls, Bulawayo and all parts of the country for support. Now we are working on a strategy to mobilise votes. “We will probably do a mini-roadshow and also visit schools to perform for pupils and teachers. We also appeal to those with influence on social media to help us push for more votes,” said Nkosikhona. DJ Ace Kater produced Amakhekhekhe whose video was shot by Ten Max from Hwange. The song seeks to address social ills associated with cheating in a relationship where Mr Culture is advising Mr Africa to desist from his habit of having multiple affairs. The twins recently released and launched a singles collection of nine songs including a remix of Amakhekhekhe where Mr Africa gets into trouble after his chain of women discover his cheating antics. One of the singles Umama Wengane features Madlela Sikhobokhobo. — Follow on Twitter @ncubeleon