The Chronicle FIFA president Gianni Infantino has tested positive for coronavirus. The 50-year-old is experiencing mild symptoms and has begun self-isolating, world football’s governing body confirmed on Tuesday. “Fifa president Gianni Infantino has received confirmation today that he has tested positive for coronavirus,” a statement said. “The Fifa president, who has reported mild symptoms, has immediately placed himself in self-isolation and will remain in quarantine at least for 10 days. “All people who came into contact with the Fifa president during the last few days have been informed accordingly and they are being requested to take the necessary steps. “Fifa sincerely wishes president Infantino a speedy recovery.” Infantino is in his second term as Fifa president, having won re-election in June last year. The former Uefa general secretary first took office in February 2016. Infantino has spoken recently of his determination to make sure the 2022 World Cup in Qatar takes place with fans attending, despite the coronavirus pandemic forcing domestic competitions to continue to restrict the number of supporters going to stadiums or banning them entirely. “I cannot imagine the Qatar 2022 World Cup without fans because playing a competition the size of the World Cup without spectators is almost no point in having, causing us big issues, and there is no doubt that the next World Cup will definitely be held in Qatar,” he said. “We have sufficient time in order to contain the coronavirus pandemic, and the global community will have done this by winter 2022. “At the present time the crisis threatens football and for the first time since World War II, football competitions around the world have been stopped. The situation has been very difficult, especially for those countries that depend on the income of fans attending.” Infantino also spoke last week about the reported European Premier League, which would potentially replace the Champions League with a new league tournament for Europe’s biggest clubs. The Fifa president refused to be drawn on whether he supported the proposal. “As Fifa president, I’m interested in the Club World Cup, not the Super League,” Infantino told reporters in Switzerland. “For me, it’s not about Bayern Munich against Liverpool, but Bayern against Boca Juniors.” — Goal