The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
The Sadc region today remembers late former Tanzanian President Mwalimu Julius Nyerere for his commitment towards an independent Africa and the development of the continent. President Nyerere died on October 14, 1999, and the Sadc bloc yesterday said it was critical to reflect on the leadership of one of Africa’s founding fathers. The late Tanzanian President actively contributed to the liberation of Zimbabwe as some of the country’s freedom fighters were trained in his country. Sadc is taking a leaf from the works of one of the continent’s founding fathers who wanted member states to be free from colonialism. In a statement to commemorate the late President Nyerere, Sadc executive secretary Dr Stergomena Lawrence Tax described him as a giant in the liberation of the continent and what the region has become. “After Tanzania gained Independence in 1961, Mwalimu Nyerere supported the liberation and the fight against racism and colonialism in most African countries. This year, the Southern African Development Community (Sadc) is commemorating its 40th anniversary since its establishment. We pay tribute to Mwalimu for laying a solid foundation for the unity, peace, freedom and socio-economic developments we are witnessing today. Sadc will continue to honour such a man of unparalleled commitment to the liberation and development,” said Dr Tax. “Today, as we celebrate Mwalimu Nyerere’s leadership and devotion to liberation and socio-economic development, I wish to underscore that the greatest honour that we can all bestow upon this great son of Africa is carry forward the vision of peace, freedom, reconciliation, social cohesion, solidarity, resilience and development for the generations to come.” She challenged the region to keep alive the late President Nyerere’s vision for Africa, as former Zambian president Dr Kenneth Kaunda previously said. Dr Tax said 21 years after his death, President Nyerere will be remembered for his desire for a free continent, playing a critical role in the foundation of the African Union. “Today, we see the footprint of Mwalimu Nyerere across the African continent for the pivotal role he played together with other eminent African leaders to establish the Organisation of African Union in 1963, which later became the African Union in 2002. As a commitment to justice and peace in Africa, Tanzania hosted the Liberation Committee of the OAU. In southern Africa, the history of SADC is incomplete without a special mention of Mwalimu Julius Nyerere who alongside other leaders, founded the Frontline States and the Southern African Development Coordination Conference (SADCC) in 1980 which he described as a ‘major instrument for self reliant development in the southern part of Africa.’ SADCC was later transformed into Sadc in 1992,” said Dr Tax. She said the continent should honour late President Nyerere for advancing socio-economic development on the continent and Tanzania in particular through education. Dr Tax said he saw education as a vehicle to address poverty. “As Mwalimu, the Swahili word for teacher, Nyerere believed that education was a key to social progress. He promoted quality education which resulted in a record increase in school enrolment and literacy levels among Tanzanians. He established the “Ujamaa Programme,” a socio-economic programme geared towards transforming rural areas of Tanzania to be self reliant and achieve sustainable development,” said Dr Tax She said it is befitting that a statue in honour of late African icon, President Nyerere is being constructed in the African Union’s Peace and Security building in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.-@nqotshili