The Chronicle Andile Tshuma BREAST cancer is one of the leading killer diseases in the country and continues to deplete the population due to its expensive treatment. Going through treatment can be physically, mentally and financially draining. Cancer treatment and recovery supplies are very expensive and many items are not covered by medical aid in Zimbabwe. The Covid-19 pandemic has not made things any better for the cancer fight, locally and globally. Many in society think that breast cancer is only for the fairer sex but it is not. Although at a much lower occurrence rate, men are also not immune to breast cancer hence the third week of October is dedicated to breast cancer awareness for men annually. October is Breast Cancer Awareness Month and statistics show that an estimated one in eight women will have breast cancer in their lifetime. Marked in countries across the world every October, breast cancer awareness month helps increase attention and support for the awareness, early detection and treatment as well as palliative care of this disease. The pink ribbon campaign is probably one of the most prominent and popular awareness campaigns in the world.
Breast cancer is defined as a malignant tumour found in the cells of the breast that originate in the lining of the milk glands or ducts of the breast (ductal epithelium). It is advised to have the breasts checked from time to time, as early detection can save lives. The three standard methods for breast cancer screening are — A Mammogram (X-ray of the breast), Clinical Breast Examination (CBE) and Breast Self-Examination (BSE). If you happen to notice any of the symptoms of breast cancer, do not take them lightly, whether you are male or female. It is better to panic and seek medical attention and be told it was just a false alarm than to be brave and take it lightly only to seek assistance when it’s too late. Better safe than sorry. Cancer Units at Mpilo Central Hospital and Parirenyatwa Group of hospitals have not been working for ages, yet corporates in the country have been painting the streets pink, going all out in marketing the pink ribbon. How about showing patriotism and supporting men and women who are affected by using those funds to fix the life-saving machines as opposed to road shows to sell your pink-themed products while here and there making mention of the hashtag #PinkOctober? Change comes when things get done. Mere talk will not yield results. While cancer prevalence is higher in women, men are not immune to it either and joint efforts in creating awareness and joining in the fight would lead to better results for all. The more awareness there is about a disease or ailment, the more empowered people are and the more they are able to handle the disease. Doctors say early detection is vital since tumours can be picked when they are still as small as four to eight millimetres, ensuring treatment success. It is however, sad that in most cases, cancer is often detected very late when it is at an advanced stage. No one is immune to cancer. While special diets, exercise and general healthier habits can help reduce chances of developing cancerous tumours by up to 40 percent, it is important for everyone to get screened often. With so much attention and resources having been channelled towards the fight against HIV and Aids, a development that saw Zimbabwe emerge as one of the success stories in Africa with an HIV prevalence rate of 13,9 percent, it however, seems not so much has been done about the silent killer, cancer. Recent statistics from the Ministry of Health and Child Care indicate that 7 000 new cancer cases are reported annually and 60 percent of them, according to the Zimbabwe National Cancer Registry, are HIV related. Of these, only some 1 300 to 2 000 are treated with radiotherapy. Worldwide, cancer is responsible for 7,6 million deaths annually, two thirds of which are recorded in low-middle income countries. A study published in the International Journal of Cancer indicates that cancer patients in Harare are not likely to survive five years after diagnosis at present levels of care, which is a greater call for action. While October is dedicated solely to breast cancer, other forms of cancer deserve attention as well. Many people, even those with resources to access chemotherapy and radiotherapy have succumbed to cancer over the years. One wonders what happens to the not so prominent members of society without access to resources. I wish men and women would appreciate this and develop a habit of visiting the doctor at least once every year for a full body check-up that includes a breast cancer check. That one not so important trip to the doctor could be a deciding factor between life and death. We are all often overwhelmed with responsibilities, sometimes we brave illnesses for the sake of time and convenience but this is very dangerous as we may seek help when we cannot be helped much. According to WHO statistics, there are about 1,38 million new cases and 458 000 deaths from breast cancer each year worldwide. Breast cancer is by far the most common cancer in women worldwide, both in the developed and developing countries. In developing countries, the incidence has been rising steadily in the last few years due to increase in life expectancy, increased urbanisation and adoption of western lifestyles. There is not sufficient knowledge on the causes of breast cancer and therefore early detection of the disease remains the cornerstone of breast cancer control. When breast cancer is detected early, and if adequate diagnosis and treatment are available, a life can be saved. Medical researchers say if detected late, however, curative treatment is often no longer an option. In such cases, palliative care to relieve the suffering of patients and their families is needed. The majority of the breast cancer deaths occur in developing countries where most women with breast cancer are diagnosed in late stages due mainly to lack of awareness on early detection and barriers to health services. We should all talk about breast cancer as much as possible, at work, at church gatherings, at socials and everywhere else where people meet. The victory is in our hands and in empowering and encouraging each other to get screened for early detection. The same way we test for HIV or blood sugar must be the same way we check for breast cancer as we may feel healthy for a very long time yet cancer may be eating away our healthy tissues. Breast cancer should not just be a woman’s issue. Men should also rally behind the pink ribbon and the pink ribbon should be a 365-day matter, not just an October issue. It is time to take awareness talk way beyond the 31 days in October through action as change will only come if people walk the talk. — @andile-tshuma