The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
THE rains being experienced in most parts of the country since last week have brought hope to livestock farmers as they have improved availability of water and pastures for the animals. Streams and pools in most parts of Matabeleland North have received significant inflows which farmers said will improve the water supply situation that had almost become dire for livestock. In the past few years farmers have lost livestock particularly cattle to drought during this time of the year due to lack of water and grazing, affecting draught power. Farmers and traditional leaders interviewed said while some animals might die in the next few days after drinking dirty water, the general outlook is promising as the rains had come early. Normal to above normal rains are projected for the 2020/2021 season a development that may boost food security and the national herd. Chief Mtshane of Bubi said farmers in his area were relieved. “Streams are full because it’s been raining in the past few days which has brought relief to people because it’s unusual for rivers to flow with the first rains. So far we have not received reports of death of animals. “We thank God for these rains and we hope none of the animals will succumb because this is the most critical period when they start feeding on new grass and drinking dirty water,” said Chief Msthane. Chief Sikhobokhobo of Nkayi said the 2020/21 season promises to be good for livestock. “I had received only one report of death of cattle which means that this year is better than last year in terms of condition of animals. It’s been raining for the past week and we hope it turns green soon for the good of animals,” he said. In some drier districts people were now sharing few available water sources with animals as boreholes and rivers had dried up. Chief Siansali of Binga said the water situation remains critical in his district as most boreholes had dried up with some communities now getting water from unsafe sources. He said there is a need for construction of small community dams specifically for animals. “The situation is critical in our area. There has been no drinking water for animals because boreholes have dried up. People are now walking long distances to look for water. “We wish the rains could intensify so that the water table improves. Going forward we wish there could be some weirs specifically for animals so that we ease pressure on boreholes,” said Chief Siansali. Acting Chief Mvutu whose area is just outside Victoria Falls said: “Dried grass and leaves which animals were feeding on is obviously rotting but we are relieved that trees will soon turn green. The rains come as farmers have embraced Intwasa/Pfumvudza conservation farming and preparing their fields for the coming cropping season.” Chief Mabhikwa of Lupane urged his subjects to follow guidelines from experts both in conservation farming and taking care of livestock. “As we speak some pools got inflows and we are grateful for the rains as some villagers were almost losing their cattle. However, the situation is not as bad as it was last year. Our biggest worry is that most of our rivers are silted. I urge farmers to seriously embrace conservation farming as directed so that they increase yields and improve livelihoods,” he said. Matabeleland North provincial veterinary officer Dr Polex Moyo urged farmers to closely watch their animals especially in the first two weeks after the first rains. He said Tsholotsho and Binga were the worst affected by drought so far. — @ncubeleon