The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Big Shumba is nothing but a soothing artiste to many in Shurugwi. Touted as one of the best in the mining town, Big Shumba (born Brian Shumba) is a Zimdancehall artiste who has been in the game for the past seven years. Speaking from Shurugwi, Big Shumba said his musical career is all credit to his former classmate Gweru producer COG Majagwa. “My music journey started when I linked with my former classmate producer, singer and songwriter COG Majagwa in Mkoba 13 in Gweru where had a studio called Evolution Muzik. I had gone for a friendly courtesy call and he insisted I do vocals on a chorus for his song MaActors. “I was not ready to be part of the project but later got on board because of our relationship as friends. Many people loved the song and from there I was inspired to showcase my talent,” he said. As Zimdancehall was rising around 2013 and 2014 Big Shumba said he was lured to join the genre. “By the time I took music as a profession, Zimdancehall was led by the likes of Winky D, Freeman, Guspy Warrior and they inspired me a lot. In the year 2013 my family and I relocated to Shurugwi and there I met DJ Lynx (Back Yard Muzik Records) and I recorded two tracks with him called Ndakavaudza paWhatsapp vakati kikiki and Ndakusuwa. “The response from my fans was good as they loved my two new tracks so I went on to release more tracks among them Zimbabwe, Ndakavabhilivhisa featuring Sir Potter among others,” said Big Shumba. He said the songs got club DJs’ attention who then persuaded him to perform at clubs in the mining town. “Club DJs Reeves and Nido discovered my talent and they called me whenever they were having the Passa Passa shows so that I could perform. From there on I have curtain raised for Harare artistes like Lady Squanda, Shinsoman, Freeman and Killer T when they came to Shurugwi. “Due to educational purposes where I pursued a National Certificate in Electrical Engineering at Gweru Polytechnic, I once dropped the mic before picking it up again this time being called in by an old friend Sir Potter who had opened a studio and wanted me on board,” said Big Shumba. The 26-year-old artiste said he wants to grow in the industry and grow beyond the small town and therefore he is in the studio cooking something and also perfecting his live performance skills so as to be ready when clubs re-open for live entertainment. “I went to Sir Potter and I released a song called Usandirasise and it was in the Midlands Top 10 on 98.4 Midlands Radio and it reached the number 1 spot in the Midlands Top 10. “Noticing the potential of the song, I went on to shoot a video which is available on my YouTube page Big Shumba Majagwa. Currently I am working on my album to be out by December,” he said. The 10-track album, MaBenjamin (US Dollar), will be released before Christmas Day. — @mthabisi_mthire.