The Chronicle Arsenal scored two quick-fire team goals to extend Sheffield United’s point-less start to the Premier League season — although the Blades did manage their first goal. The Gunners did not really get going until the 60th minute when Bukayo Saka celebrated his first England call-up with a header from Hector Bellerin’s cross. Three minutes later they doubled their lead with Nicolas Pepe’s good run and finish into the bottom corner — finishing off a move with 19 passes. They looked completely in control until David McGoldrick curled home the Blades’ first league goal of the season. But it was not enough to affect the outcome and United have now lost seven consecutive top-flight games for the first time since 1975. Mikel Arteta’s Arsenal move onto six points from three games, having lost 2-0 to champions Liverpool last Monday. It was far from Arsenal’s best performance of the season — but they made it four wins from four games in all competitions, against teams other than Liverpool. They could have been down to 10 men in the first half when David Luiz pulled back Oliver Burke as the Scot chased onto a poor back-pass, with Bernd Leno coming out of his box to clear, but the referee and the VAR team did not deem any punishment necessary. It took 28 minutes for the game’s first attempt as Eddie Nketiah flicked a header towards goal. That was the longest wait for a shot in any Premier League game in 2020. The Gunners had the better chances in the first half but Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang forced a good diving save from Aaron Ramsdale and then hit an acrobatic volley at the goalkeeper. Sheffield United had a red card let-off of their own as Sander Berge was only booked for a lunging tackle on Aubameyang, who was hurt but able to carry on. Their two strikes were worth the wait, the result of fine passing moves. Aubameyang lifted a pass over the top to Bellerin, whose clipped cross was headed into the top corner by Saka at the far post. And then substitute Pepe played a one-two with Bellerin before running at the Blades defence and slotting home via the base of the post. Their main disappointment will have been losing a clean sheet and causing a few tense moments late on when the game looked safe. Sheffield United’s worrying form continues The Blades’ European dream was finished by three consecutive defeats at the end of last season — and that losing run has carried over into this campaign. After failing to score in their opening three league games for the first time in their history, Chris Wilder spent a club-record £23.5m on Liverpool striker Rhian Brewster — although he was not registered in time to make his debut at Emirates Stadium. They ended the game with six shots, as many as Arsenal, but few of them were clear chances. McGoldrick’s high and wide effort was their only shot in the first half, but the Republic of Ireland striker did eventually hit the target with a fine 20-yard effort from George Baldock’s pass. Results
Arsenal 2-1 Sheffield Utd; Wolves 1-0 Fulham; Southampton 2-0 West Brom; Leicester 0-3 West Ham — Daily Mail