The Chronicle Business Reporters
FARMERS have roundly lauded the Government for improved support ahead of the 2020/21 cropping season and are excited by the drive to “climate proof” the sector to ensure adequate food security.
Regional and local meteorological experts have predicted that the country is set to receive normal to above normal rainfall, raising hopes for a fruitful season after two years of successive droughts. The Government has led the process, with support from partners, to enable farmers to adequately prepare by providing inputs and training farmers across the country. The Agritex officers are already assisting farmers countrywide with soil sampling and analysis in order to ensure appropriate agronomic practices. The launch of the “Intwasa/Gebha udle/Pfumvudza” programme is expected to yield good results given its conservation focus and climate sensitivity. The national thrust for production should see Zimbabwe with a US$8,2 billion agriculture economy by 2025 under the Agriculture and Food Systems Transformation Strategy that was launched by President Mnangagwa in August. The command agriculture arm for commercial farmers is also active and the Government and private sector have poured huge resources to support the scheme. Just last week, President Mnangagwa launched the US$51 million mechanisation facility with support from Belarus. This is also being buttressed by the Presidential Inputs Support programme directed to capacitate smallholder farmers. Irrigation facilities and water resource development projects are also being worked on through Treasury allocations, as part of the long-term plan to restore Zimbabwe’s bread basket status. These strategies are being implemented to revamp production to ensure and assure food security, increase import substitution, diversifying and increasing exports through higher value addition and beneficiation. Zimbabwe Farmers Union (ZFU) director, Mr Paul Zakariya, said the climate proofing focus was a step in the right direction. “We will need to ensure that strategies to climate proof our enterprises take centre stage. Implementing tried and tested climate smart agricultural practices and methods will bring the value,” he said in an interview. “Rain fed agriculture will not yield much. This has been established over the years. While we encourage irrigation development for bigger operations, smallholder farmers will need to be assisted with micro-drip kits as that will help them to produce all year round.” Mr Zakariya said the twin drive of Intwasa/Pfumvudza and command agriculture programmes will go a long way towards assisting farmers to access inputs this season. “Careful thought has been put in mobilising smallholder farmers to be trained and prepare for the season. It is our considered view that this particular season will not go to waste. There is a huge expectation that increased yields will be realised,” he said. Mr Zakariya said livestock farmers must also come on board and work closely with the Government to improve on animal health and nutrition so as to grow the national herd. “The last two years saw many farmers losing cattle to tick-borne diseases. Efforts must be put towards closing that huge gap,” he said. Chief executive officer of Foundations for Farming Global, Mr Blessing Craig, said getting inputs to farmers on time was critical and urged farmers to play their role and be self-sufficient in coming years. Youths in Agriculture Apex Council Board (YAACB) chairperson, Mr John Muchenje, said: “The timeous disbursements of inputs by the Government is wonderful as it is a critical determining factor on the production. “The challenge that most farmers faced in the past was late distribution of inputs which at times started on the onset of the rains. The Intwasa/Pfumvudza concept is very good and as farmers we are happy that the programme has seen early distribution of inputs.” Youthful Bulawayo-based farmer, Mrs Nonceba Mwedzi-Agwaniru, said more opportunities exist for the livestock sector. “We hope this support will go a long way in assisting us reclaim our position as the country’s beef producing region,” she said. Ms Lungile Nyathi, a farmer from Matabeleland North said the Government support has come in handy for farmers. “In past seasons farmers were affected by drought hence this conservation method is expected to mitigate the effects of drought,” she said.