The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
Over 197 000 farmers have completed preparing three plots each at their homesteads under the Presidential Intwasa/Pfumvudza Climate Proof Programme in the Midlands province. The province has trained over 200 000 people with 197 033 of them having taken the training to their homesteads where they have prepared the plots by digging the holes and putting mulch for conservation of soil moisture, improving fertility and health of the soil They are now waiting for the rains so that they plant their seeds. Farmers are encouraged to prepare three plots — one for family grain, the other one for supplying the Grain Marketing Board and the last one for producing a commercial crop like sunflower, soya beans or cotton depending on the area. Intwasa/Pfumvudza promotes conservation farming techniques and involves use of small plots on smallholder farms and applying the correct agronomic practices for higher returns to boost household food security and ensure Zimbabwean farmers move from subsistence towards prosperity. Under this programme, small-scale farmers across all eight rural provinces have been given the target of 1,8 million tonnes of cereals and 360 000 tonnes of oil seeds in the forthcoming summer cropping season. Through Intwasa/Pfumvudza and the Command Agriculture programme, President Mnangagwa is confident that Zimbabwe will wave goodbye to food imports in two years’ time, especially considering that the country expects normal to above normal rains this season. Addressing the Zanu-PF Midlands Provincial Coordinating Committee meeting in Gweru recently, the Minister of State for Midlands Provincial Affairs and Devolution Larry Mavima said training for Intwasa/Pfumvudza programme is ongoing adding that the programme was open to everyone. He said no one should be left behind in the programme that is expected to ensure communal farmers move towards prosperity. “As a province we have trained over 200 000 people under this climate proof programme and of these, 197 033 people have adopted it at their homes. They have dug up holes and have received inputs. Our target is 270 000 people. So, let’s encourage our people in our communities to embrace this programme so that they are trained and after they dig the holes, they will be given the free farming inputs,” said Minister Mavima. He said he was a bit worried about the uptake of the programme adding that the province was lagging behind as compared to other provinces. Minister Mavima said they were looking at strategies and ways of getting more people in the programme such as introducing competitions and awards for farmers who would have excelled. “We are looking at different strategies of getting many people on the programs. Our structures can assist in recruiting more people to join Intwasa/Pfumvudza. We are also working on introducing competitions or awards where farmers who excel will win something. So, we are working with Agritex and other well-wishers to come up with awards that can be won by farmers who would have excelled. So, we want to introduce incentives for winners to encourage more people to embrace this programme. This programme is a game changer and If we follow it properly, we won’t go wrong. As a province we want to increase land under Intwasa/Pfumvudza,” he said. Minister Mavima said they have received 77 motorbikes for Agritex officers so that they are mobile to visit many farmers and assist them improve farming methods for increased yields. “Availability of motorbikes will also assist Agritex officers move around the districts to offer assistance and impart knowledge to farmers. So, we have received 77 motorbikes for Agritex officers in the province. We are hoping to receive another batch of about 51 and that should give us enough motorbikes for our Agritex officers to be able to travel around the province to how farmers are doing under this programme,” he said. The national production is expected to be 1,8 million metric tonnes of cereals and 360 000 metric tonnes of oil seeds, both sufficient to meet human consumption requirements for a year.