The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
BULAWAYO will host the Anti-Sanctions Virtual Gala on Saturday as the country and the Sadc region unite to call for the removal of the illegal embargo on Zimbabwe. Sadc last year declared October 25 as Anti-Sanctions Day and the gala is part of activities that Zimbabwe has lined up this month. Zimbabwe has been under illegal sanctions for the past 20 years following the successful land reform exercise at the turn of the millennium. This year’s Anti-Sanctions theme is “Resilience, Progress and Solidarity under an environment of sanctions.” The gala will be aired live on ZBCtv with President Emmerson Mnangagwa expected to address the nation during the event. Director of Media Services in the Ministry of Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Anywhere Mutambudzi said through the gala Zimbabwe wants the message for the sanctions removal to be heard loud and clear. “The message we want to get out there is that, as Zimbabwe we want the sanctions removed and the region has been calling for that and has come together to give out the same message. We as Zimbabwe have been under sanctions for years, but as the theme says we are charting our own destiny despite being under sanctions,” said Mutambudzi. He said preparations were at an advanced stage for the virtual gala. “The gala is set to be held in Bulawayo and preparations are on course. We have secured a venue for the gala where artistes will belt their songs in solidarity with our message about the removal of sanctions,” said Mutambudzi. He said they would sit down today to come up with the list of between 15 to 20 artistes to perform at the gala. “With the artistes we will choose for the gala we want to show the unity of the country. We shall have our flagship artistes who draw crowds and then we shall have those who’ve been producing content specifically denouncing these sanctions. The list of artistes will be released during the course of the week,” said Mutambudzi. “People should note that this is a virtual gala hence we aren’t having a live audience, but just artistes. This is in line with the Covid-19 regulations that have been put in place by Government and these during the virtual show will be adhered to strictly. People can watch at home.”