The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
BRIGADIER-GENERAL Sambulo Ndlovu who died on Tuesday due to a Covid-19-related illness in Harare was buried yesterday in Bulawayo at Lady Stanley Cemetery. He was 65. Brig-Gen Ndlovu was buried in compliance with Covid-19 regulations as only a few people were allowed to attend his burial. Even a military parade, which is usually conducted when a general dies was not held. A career soldier, his glittering military CV depicts him as a virtual encyclopedia of combat techniques and soldierly strategy. Brig-Gen Ndlovu is credited for the recruitment of many youths to join the liberation struggle in the early 1970s via Botswana. In his youth, he was in the Zapu structures after joining Zimbabwe People’s Revolutionary Army (ZIPRA) in 1974 where he trained in Zambia before being transferred to Soviet Union where he specialised in communications. After independence, he was attested to the ZNA and his military astuteness resulted in him being deployed in various peace keeping missions in the region. Even after he retired from the army, in February this year, Brig Gen Ndlovu was retained so that younger officers could tap into his vast knowledge. His burial was attended by family members, a handful of senior army officials both serving and retired and Bulawayo Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Judith Ncube who observed that Brig-Gen Ndlovu contributions to the country befits that he be declared a national hero. “I was listening to his biography as was read by Major-General David Sigauke. Indeed, we are burying a national hero. There is no doubt about that. We mourn with the Ndlovu family, his widow and we say we have to accept that it was the Lord’s time. He survived very dangerous encounters during the war of independence only to be killed by an invisible enemy Covid-19,” said Minister Ncube. Brig-Gen Ndlovu’s elder brother Mr Themba Ndlovu said the family believes he deserved to be declared a national hero. “He served this country and we believe he deserved to be declared a national hero. We have heard that the application has been submitted for him to be declared so, but the response delayed and we had to proceed with the burial. We are devastated by his death as a family but we just have to accept his demise. Covid-19 is killing a lot of people across the world and there is nothing we could have done. This is a pandemic,” said Mr Ndlovu. ZNA Chief of Staff (General Staff) Maj-Gen Sigauke, eulogised Brig-Gen as a fine soldier who served the country with due diligence. He said Brig-Gen Ndlovu was no ordinary man but a true revolutionary who contributed to both domestic and regional peace. “Brig-Gen Ndlovu will be remembered for immense contribution to the liberation struggle, standing firm for justice and defending Zimbabwe’s interests both domestically and in the foreign domain. He was a warm likeable, humble, patriotic, selfless team player and indeed a true diplomat par-excellence and a revolutionary cadre,” he said. “He gave up his youth to fight for the freedom we enjoy today. He committed his whole life to serving Zimbabwe and fought to defend her interests. He made valuable contributions to regional peace and security. Above all, he remained focused and steadfast in the face of neo-colonial machinations.” Maj-Gen Sigauke said as the nation pays last respects to Brig-Gen Ndlovu, citizens should uphold his principles and values of putting the country’s interests first. Maj-Gen Sigauke said Brig-Gen Ndlovu was attested to ZNA as a private and was posted to 404 Infantry Battalion where he was sent for Officers Standardisation Course at the Zimbabwe Military Academy in September 1981. He said Brig-Gen Ndlovu held senior positions in both Sadc and in the country “On 6 October 1982 he was posted to Headquarters, Midlands District as the Staff Officer Grade Two responsible for administration. During the same year he was promoted to the substantive rank of Lieutenant on 11 November 1982 and became a Temporary Major. During his service, he held several appointments which included Officer Commanding of an Infantry Company, Officer Commanding of a Provost Company, Acting Commanding Officer, Administrative Staff Officer Grade Two, Officer Commanding of a Training Company, Battalion Second in Command, Brigade Major, General Staff Officer Grade Two responsible for operations, Directing Staff at the SADC Regional Peacekeeping Training Centre, Commandant Army School of Physical Training and Sports, Directing Staff Joint Command and Staff Course, Staff Officer Grade One responsible for the ZNA Tactical Trainer,” he said. “General Staff Officer Grade One Plans at the SADC Regional Peacekeeping Training Centre, Deputy Head Operations and Training at the SADC Regional Peacekeeping Training Centre and Deputy Team Leader Project Sustain, the appointment he held till his retirement.” Maj-Gen Sigauke added: “During his illustrious career, the late General attended several courses which included Officers Standardisation Course, Company Commanders Course Junior Staff Course and Joint Command and Staff Course. The late General served with various units which included 404 Infantry Battalion, Headquarters Midlands District, 53 Infantry Battalion, Zimbabwe Military Police, 28 Infantry Battalion, Army School of Physical Training and Sports, Headquarters Harare District, 4 Infantry Brigade, Zimbabwe Staff College, SADC Regional Peacekeeping Training Centre and Food Production Department.” Maj Gen Sigauke said the military enjoys food self-sustenance due to the foundation he laid for the ZNA Army Food Production Department. He said he managed to raise the Zimbabwe’s flag high during his time serving in peace missions in the region. “The late Brig-Gen participated in the Mozambique Campaign and Operation Sovereign Legitimacy in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Due to his vast military experience, the late military strategist was seconded to the SADC Regional Peacekeeping Training Centre where he worked as Staff Officer Grade One responsible for planning, Defence Director and Deputy Head Operations and Training. While at the Regional Peacekeeping Training Centre, he was promoted to the rank of Colonel in 2013 in recognition of his distinguished service,” he said. “Notable contributions by the late Brig Gen during his stint at the Regional Peacekeeping Training Centre spanning from 1999 to 2014 are that he managed to raise the Zimbabwe Defence Forces flag high after he played an important role in the planning and coordination of regional peacekeeping exercises which included Exercise Blue Crane held in South Africa in April 1999, Exercise Tanzanite held in Tanzania in February 2002, Exercise Thokgamo held in Botswana in 2005 and Exercise Golfinho held in South Africa in 2009.” He was accorded the Independence Medal, Liberation Medal, Service Medal, Long and Exemplary Service Medal, Mozambique Campaign Medal, Democratic Republic of Congo Campaign and the Commander of the Zimbabwe Order of Merit Award, in recognition of his illustrious works. Brig-Gen Ndlovu is survived by his wife Sarah Ndlovu and six children. — @nqotshili