The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
GOVERNMENT has been urged to intervene and break the impasse between the Zimbabwe National Water Authority (ZINWA) and Beitbridge municipality who have a long-standing tussle to control water affairs. Speaking during the 2021 annual budget consultations yesterday, residents and various stakeholders said the dispute between the two parties had affected the constant supply of water and also pushed up tariffs. They said it was important for water and sewer management systems in the town to be refocused in line with the town’s transformation into a medium city, where industries may function effectively with all the ingredients including water. Zinwa is selling bulk treated water to the local authority which then distributes the water to residents and businesses. This has seen residents paying high water charges which are now as much as Z$10 000 a month as council puts a mark up to the Zinwa water price. “The situation here is not workable, we appeal to Government to intervene so that council takes over the water supply service from Zinwa. To make matters worse Zinwa is not willing to engage residents arguing that we are not their clients. We should drop the middleman concept,” said Ms Patricia Ndlovu of Ward 3. Chairperson of the Beitbridge Residents Association, Mr Timothy Zendera said it was important to have one player dealing with water provision. He said water was critical for both infrastructure development and industrial growth. “Our problem is that the people running our water povision service are in Bulawayo yet we have a local authority which can do the job better. “In addition, the advantage of having the town council running the entire water provision service is that challenges including supply and maintenance can be addressed by those people on the ground. We have had no joy with Zinwa who are reluctant to hear our grievances,” he said. Beitbridge East Parliamentarian, Albert Nguluvhe who attended the same meeting said he will engage Government to find a solution to the perennially contentious issue.