The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
BEITBRIDGE residents have advised the local municipality to prioritise the upgrading of roads and ensure that there are sewer and water connections to new suburbs. There are over 3 000 properties in the newly built areas, where residents have to sink their own boreholes and use septic tanks. Those that are not financially sound have to buy water sold in bowsers and various tanks. A bucket of treated water is sold for between R5 and R7, while borehole water costs R3. Bulk raw water from mainly the Limpopo River and boreholes is sold at R100 per 100 litres. The state of affairs in the new suburbs has also seen Government failing to allocate 28 houses to its workers because of sewer and water connection problems. Speaking during the 2021 budget consultation meeting recently, residents said the situation at new houses was deplorable. “Our plea as residents is that the local authority should direct a huge chunk of its resources to service residential stands on the west of the town with water and sewer. “It’s disheartening that since 2012, council is yet to connect hundreds of households to sewer and water. Most people in the new suburbs have to buy water daily from vendors. This cannot go on forever,” said Ms Brenda Dombojena. She said the local authority had done nothing on the ground for a long time. Ms Dombojena said it boggles the mind why council had failed to service residential stands which it had sold to the community in foreign currency. “For us to have meaningful development, let’s get water first to the houses and most people are willing to pay for such facilities,” she said. Ms Patricia Ndlovu, said the state of the roads in the town was deplorable. “Let’s put some money to fix major link roads which have become virtually unavailable. “The poor state of the roads should not be allowed to persist. It is important that we finish off all ongoing roads and water and sewer servicing projects before starting new initiatives,” she said. Town clerk, Mr Loud Ramakgapola said during the same meeting that the servicing of stands was being done in phases and that they will soon cover all the outstanding areas. “We note the concerns from the ratepayers and let me inform you that as we speak our teams are on the ground laying sewer and water pipes. This is an ongoing project, we hope to complete soon,” he said. Some residents said the local authority should also commit funds to put stormwater drains, mostly in high-density suburbs. The residents also want council to speed up the upgrading of the Dulivhadzimu Bus Terminus, complete the installation of prepaid water metres, finalise the storm drains on the Wamlala stream which cuts across the town, construct a low-cost lodge to widen the council’s revenue base. The issue of unserviced housing land has remained a thorn in the residents’ flesh. Last year Beitbridge municipality attempted to evict over 100 residents that have occupied unserviced housing land in the Kwalu suburb (formerly SDP Housing). This followed concerns from the Environmental Management Authority.