The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
INTWASA Arts Festival koBulawayo has received a total of 105 short stories for its short story competition with 16 being shortlisted and the winner set to walk away with US$200. The winner for the competition will be announced in November. This year the competition had no theme, hence the writers were able to tackle diverse topics. After months of reviewing the submitted stories from the competition, the 16 shortlisted stories include eight from Bulawayo, five from Harare, one from Mutare, one from Plumtree and one from Gwanda. The list of the names and the short stories are: Do you need a hand? by Billet-Doux Wisdom Siqhoza, Robbery at 249 Gwabalanda by Banqobile V Dakamela, Herald of New Times by Rutendo Salome Chichaya, Tawe’s Redemption by Rodney Manyakaidze, Healing by Takatso Sibanda, I Am Here for You, Are You? by Fikile A Mkandla, Quarantine Season by Rukudzo Kachambgwa, Blood runs through the periwinkles by Dumisile Mtambo, The Jacaranda Letter by Nyaradzai Emelda Gwatima, 15 years a wife by Nkosilesisa Kwanele Ncube, The Naked Condition by Millicent M Ngezimama, Blood by Abigail Sibanda, In-between by Sostina C Magorimbo, The Plot by Tariro Ndoro, Lovelorn by Chiedza Enia Mutare and Drought by Lungile Getrude Msimanga. According to the judges, they were impressed by the standard of work submitted for the competition this year. “While judging the 105 entries we noted the following, the standard of work certainly was higher than last year’s entries. The no theme approach liberated the competition and encouraged writers to tackle diverse issues. Writers tackled issues like Covid-19, family conflict, love, violence, human trafficking, loss, tradition and politics,” read the statement from Intwasa. In addition, the statement gave some feedback to aspiring writers in order to intrigue judges in the future. “The majority of pieces were written in the first person (the third person usually opens up more possibilities). However, if one decides on the first person, they have to work extra hard to weave a powerful and convincing story, looking for intrigue. We wanted to be taken on a journey. “Many stories lacked a powerful opening; many story questions were not answered. We expected to be puzzled and surprised. To be shocked or wowed. And we found this lacking in most of the stories. Most stories were heavy on superfluous metaphors and big words. Characterisation was also a challenge. Most felt unreal. “Some endings were hurried, not very convincing. Though we didn’t expect well-knit ending we expected at least some logic and satisfaction.” Intwasa Arts Festival koBulawayo will be held from December 21 to 24. – Follow on Twitter @bonganinkunzi.