The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
THE 13th edition of the Sanganai/Hlanganani World Tourism Expo begins today through the virtual platform ending tomorrow, with more than 150 local and international exhibitors expected to participate. Organiser of the event, the Zimbabwe Tourism Authority (ZTA), said the virtual expo was one of the first of its kind in Africa and promises to deliver a first-class platform for exhibitors and buyers. “The 13th edition of Sanganai/Hlanganani World Tourism Expo 2020 roars into life virtually. ZTA will hold its first ever virtual Sanganai/Hlanganani — World Tourism Expo exhibition from 22 to 23 October 2020,” said the tourism authority in a statement. “The Sanganai/Hlanganani Virtual platform will be one of the first of its kind to be hosted in Africa and promises to deliver a first-class platform for exhibitors and buyers.” The virtual exhibition forms part of the Tourism Recovery Plan with the aim of achieving a US$5 billion economy by 2025. Recently, the Government re-opened the tourism sector after six months of Covid-19 pandemic-induced lockdown. ZTA said the re-opening of the tourism sector was likely to boost numbers of both domestic and international tourists. “The last six months have been a trying time for the events and exhibitions industry with an uncertain future. However, with innovation or adaptation from exhibition organisers, digital platforms now offer greater opportunities and will address the crisis that had paralysed the tourism industry,” said the authority. ZTA says it has taken the decision to adapt and create an impressive multi-media experience for businesses seeking to market their goods and services in a world locked down by Covid-19 restrictions. The National Conventions Bureau acting executive director, Ms Pauline Ndlovu, was quoted saying the virtual platform offers flexibility to schedule, book and hold meetings from the comfort of one’s office or home. To date more than 150 local and international exhibitors have registered to interact with more than 100 top buyers from across the globe, said ZTA. The digital expo will feature interactive webinar sessions with professionals that are aimed at equipping the industry and the public with the latest tourism trends. It is hoped that the planned webinars will also touch on key issues that include strategies to be employed by the industry to improve capacity as a destination to recover and grow the sector during and post the Covid-19 era. Destination presentations will share the state of preparedness of tourism venues and facilities throughout the country. Participants are expected to interact with presenters so that they may be able to address their concerns. — @okazunga.