The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
ZVISHAVANE radio station YaFM’s DJ Flexx has become the talk of the town through his Friday night show in which he interviews most controversial Zimbabwean artistes locally and abroad about trending social media information either on their careers or personal lives. The show Kuisa Pakona Toponderana Musaga/Ukufakwa Ekhoneni Siqedelane Esakeni is held from 9pm to 12 midnight. DJ Flexx has interviewed the likes of South Africa-based Buffalo Souljah, Bazooka and Enzo Ishall, Hwinza. Having done great in hosting the battle for supremacy between Shatta Walle and Buffalo Souljah on who is the king of dancehall, DJ Flexx said his next focus is on the Matabeleland region-based artistes as the station covers areas among them Gwanda, Filabusi, Kwekwe and Insiza. “I host these shows of controversial interviews with artistes mainly to help audiences mingle with their favourite artistes. It’s not every day that they get to get first-hand information on issues spreading on social media and this is a chance of setting the record straight. “Having interviewed big artistes as Jamaican Mr Easy, my target is now to get artistes in Matabeleland region the likes of Helen Nyati, Mimmz, Noma and Raggae Boss Centre Party, among others,” said DJ Flexx. The show from 10pm is all about promoting artistes on new works and has been dubbed Zimbe or Bag Rezvinyowani. DJ Flexx said there is a need for Matabeleland artistes and others countrywide to embrace the growth of the station. “The radio station is all about promoting the nation’s artistes but few of them have taken it upon themselves to utilise the opportunity for their growth countrywide and regionally,” he said. DJ Flexx was hailed on social media recently for his other show on Saturday branded by fans as Chibhawabhawa as he goes for club hits which many are crying out for as clubs are closed. The Kadoma-born DJ said his career started when Mike Joka (ex-hubby to Plaxedes Wenyika) and one Willis opted to try build up a sound called Lion Heart and that’s when he started feeling he had to be a DJ. “I used to be the brains behind Flexxus Studioz in Kadoma where Kinna, Mostaf, Leah and Mudzonga were part of the family. “I’m popularly known for hyping clubs in Kadoma and recently Club Vatican in Zvishavane and all this is credit to having been groomed by the legend DJ Sasha of Mafoota Jams. I later moved to Bulawayo and played alongside legends like DJ Mzoe, DJ Tawaz, DJ Prince Eskhosini, KidWeaked and DJ Obama where I got to learn a couple of tricks,” he said. DJ Flexx later moved to Zvishavane. — Follow on Twitter @mthabisi_mthire.