The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Football Union of Zimbabwe (Fuz) has called for the cancellation of the Warriors’ international friendly against Malawi set for Kamuzu Stadium in Blantyre on Sunday, citing high risks of injury to players, as most of them have been inactive for eight months. In a statement yesterday, the players’ representative body said according to the return to play protocols in normal football settings, players need a full pre-season training programme which is about six to eight weeks and for those whose leagues have resumed at least three weeks of high intensity group training is required before resuming play so that players retain optimal football specific endurance, speed, strength and co-ordination. Thus, the duration, frequency and intensity of training sessions should gradually increase, considering the potential temporary immune system depression within the Covid-19 emergency period. Players carry the greatest risk and social cost in the context of return to play scenarios. At the same time, high performance sports and intensified workload require a maximum amount of sport specific training and medical assistance. The absence of any insurance plan makes this even worse, reads the Fuz statement. It said the health and safety of its members was not for a negotiating platform and it was of great concern that Zifa has made arrangements or the team to travel by bus for a distance of more than 600km way. “It should be noted that the locally-based players have not trained for more than eight months and the foreign-based have travelled long distances only to be subjected to more traveling. All kinds of travel can take a toll on health for reasons ranging from dehydration to exhaustion which can contribute to decreased performance, players’ accuracy and reaction time and increased chances of making errors that can cause injuries to them. “The low levels of preparedness by the association in relation to this match thus leaves our players at high risk of injuries, fatigue and other career threatening problems. As Fuz we wish to make an appeal to the authorities to cancel this game for the goodness of our players and find another solution which does not leave our members susceptible to health problems. Let’s not continue normalising abnormal situations and setting a wrong precedence due to lack of planning,” said Fuz.