The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma in Silonkwe, Kezi
THE commissioning of Silonkwe Base Station has empowered seven rural schools in Kezi, Matobo District, to begin e-learning. The base station offers 3G network which is key in the access of Information Communication Technologies (ICTs). Following the outbreak of the deadly Covid-19, online lessons have become the cornerstone of ensuring learners keep up with their education. The traditional face to face/physical learning model has been minimised to prevent the spread of the virus which thrives in crowds. For rural schools, challenges of network availability have stalled access to e-learning as most base stations in some rural areas use slow network connections. Speaking at the commissioning of the base station in Kezi recently, Minister of Information Communication Technology (ICT), Postal and Courier Dr Jenfan Muswere hailed Matobo North MP Cde Edgar Moyo who is also the Deputy Minister of Primary and Secondary Education for his dedication in ensuring the base station acts as a bridge to the digital divide. He praised Matabeleland South Provincial Minister Cde Abednico Ncube for his continuous support in projects by the Ministry. “Please join me in acknowledging the Minister of State for Provincial Affairs for Matabeleland South, Hon Abednico Ncube, not only for being a courteous host, but for actively spearheading development within the province. “I would also wish to congratulate the MP for the area, who is also the Deputy Minister of Primary and Secondary Education Hon Edgar Moyo, for his commitment to his constituency, which has seen this 3G base station become a catalyst towards improving access to ICTs for 7 rural schools within the area, capacitating them for e-learning, and plugging the digital gap as we embrace the Digital Economy,” said Minister Muswere. Minister Muswere said such occasions should become the norm in the Second Republic to ensure network expansion across the country. “As I officially commission Silonkwe site today, I hereby urge the community to safeguard the infrastructure to ensure that it is not vandalised. “We look forward to more interventions and network expansion from NetOne, as well as all the other players within the ICT sector. Zimbabwe is indeed open for business,” he said. Minister Muswere reiterated the Government’s resolve to improve mobile accessibility, which he said was strengthened by the visionary leadership of President Mnangagwa. “The world is being driven by innovation, information and communication technologies, as such ICTs have become key fundamentals in the attainment of Zimbabwe’s Vision 2030, and becoming an upper middle income economy. “As the Ministry of ICT, Postal and Courier Services, our mandate is to use information technologies and communication solutions, to improve the livelihoods of all Zimbabweans, irrespective of location, throughout our great nation,” he said. Minister Muswere urged the Silonkwe and entire Kezi community to embrace the enhanced network provision, to facilitate and promote trade, within the constituency. — @mthabisi_mthire.