The Chronicle Langalakhe Mabena, Showbiz Correspondent
From the thickest of Gwanda in Phakama, Matabeleland South, Maison Maphosa had a long-held dream to start up a world-recognised debaters’ club that would benefit pupils especially the underprivileged ones to realise their dreams. As he fell into an intimate relationship with debate while he was doing Form One at Gwanda High School, Maphosa made it a point that he would work hard to be a famed debater and represent Zimbabwe at greater heights. “I developed the passion for debate in 2010 while doing Form One. Advocacy made me fall in love with debating because it shaped and allowed me with the ability to speak out, argue and defend myself,” said Maphosa who is studying towards a Bachelor’s degree in Chemical Engineering at the University of Western Australia. To date, he has represented Zimbabwe in numerous countries including Malaysia and Indonesia where he was a finalist in 2018 and at Singapore Yale Nus Pro 2020 and Nepal UMSU International Debate Open 2020 where he was crowned as a semi-finalist. As a way of lending a hand and create more advocate debaters, Maphosa founded a debate club called The Royalty Pact Debating Academy (RPDA). The club which has a total of 69 members, of whom 60 are students and nine trainers, is dotted in Zimbabwe, South Africa and Tanzania and hoping to expand to more countries. “I decided to create the RPDA club so that we groom eloquent orators who will be able to advocate for people’s rights. The club started with only three members but now we are 69 combined from three countries. We are hoping to expand. “Debating is a journey filled with ups and downs. Often times when young people try debating, they easily quit because they believe they are not good enough. It is our task to inspire them not to give up on their dreams. That is what we do at RPDA” said Maphosa. The RPDA club was formed in 2017 and it has graced various competitions including the Africa University Debate International Open 2018, Oxford Schools Zimbabwe rounds in 2019, Jozi Summer Holiday Open in 2019. Other competitions they participated in are Ispaham Tournament 2020 with RPDA team Zimbabwe breaking into the quarter finals and the University of Witwatersrand Open (Club Grill), to mention a few. – @langamabena.