The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
ATHLETICS Zimbabwe (AZ) will tomorrow hold its annual general meeting in Gweru, with its president Tendai Tagara saying they will adhere to prescribed Covid-19 protocols. Following what Tagara described as a tough year as most races were cancelled due to the global coronavirus pandemic, the association will table plans for the next coming 365 days. A number of events, including the association’s national championships and the famed PPC Matopos 33-Mile were cancelled. Some of the road races that run under the auspices of AZ like the Old Mutual Westgate Half Marathon were held virtually to give athletes and fun runners an opportunity to be active during the year. Next month, another top-drawer event, the Victoria Falls Marathon will be held virtually. Despite athletics having been deemed as low risk due to its low contact nature and is among sports that were given the green light to resume activities by the Sports and Recreation Commission, AZ seem to have given up on the idea of holding any race before the end of the year. Tagara said the AGM will also address developments that followed their midyear virtual meeting that was meant to map the way forward for athletics in the country. “Our annual general meeting is on this Saturday and delegates will start arriving in Gweru on Friday. This is a special meeting in the sense that this year the calendar was affected by Covid-19 but we did other training programmes to capacitate coaches and administrators. We shall be reviewing 2020 and brief members on the financials. “I think the other major highlight will be on planning for next season. Already, athletes have been training under the programmes sent to them by the coaches,” said Tagara. AZ will also brief delegates on the outcome of the Covid-19 relief package which they had applied for. Government, through the Ministry of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation launched a $10 million package to help athletes. The Athletes Commission, guided by Cuthbert Nyasango led the selection process for athletes that benefitted from the relief package.— @ZililoR