The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
KWEKWE-based ferrochrome producer, Zimasco, says it will not be deterred from resuming operations despite having three workers testing positive for Covid-19. The company is finalising preparations to restart production after it temporarily suspended operations at the height of lockdown measures. General manager in charge of marketing and administration, Ms Clara Sadomba, confirmed the positive Covid-19 tests and said the company has intensified testing and protective measures ahead of reopening while affected workers are in isolation. “We did find positive cases when we carried out tests in preparation of opening. Every worker goes through the RTD test at our local clinic prior to being allowed entry. If this is negative, we proceed and will take them through our procedures and processes to make sure,” she said. “Should the RTD be positive then there will be need for the person to undergo a PCR test to establish accuracy of the positive result and we will then be guided on a way forward from that.” Visitors, according to Ms Sadomba, also go through the same process. She said the positive cases will, however, not hinder operations at the smelting company. “As part of the procedures to return to work and entering the workplace, employees were tested before returning. In terms of Covid-19 protocols, those found positive would have followed the Government guidelines of isolation. These workers did not enter the workplace and their absence out of a workforce of nearly 500 would not stop operations,” she explained. Zimasco is an integrated ferrochrome producer and operates chromite mining locations in Shurugwi, Guinea Fowl, Lalapanzi, Mutorashanga and tributary operations along the Great Dyke of Zimbabwe. Its non-core operations include coal-bed methane and ranching assets in Zimbabwe. The company employs 750 workers directly and more than 1 000 indirectly. The company suspended its smelting and mining operations in March as the local industry suffered from the crippling effects of the deadly Covid-19 pandemic.