The Chronicle Nkosilathi Sibanda, Showbiz Correspondent
IT took a tour with the popular Pastor Elias Musakwa of the Ngaavongwe Gospel crew for one artiste based in Binga to chart a lifetime career in music. Sharing the stage with the Ngaavongwe crew was the most defining moment for Ellison Mudenda’s love for Christian music. Popular by his stage name “Wa Chulwa”, the musician has taken a leap, with great strides, to do Christian songs in his native Tonga language. Tonga is an official language in the country but there still remains a few recorded artistes who sing in the language. Wa Chulwa’s mission is to spread the Gospel in African languages. “My music has to reach out to people. Singing in our native languages helps to spread the Word and heal people through music,” said Wa Chulwa in an interview from his base at Binga business centre. “Of course, I have done songs in English but I feel the best way is to reach out to God’s people through music that they will understand. Everyday language which people are used to.” At the tender age of 11, Wa Chulwa made headlines as he became the youngest member in a star-studded cast of the Ngaavongwe musicians. He was at Sinansengwe primary school where he was spotted before the tour to Hwange. Up to now, one of his first hits as a boy, Ajane Twalumbila is still a favourite to many in church and outside. Wa Chulwa was to raise the bar at the Siabuwa secondary school choir. From there, he never looked back. For him, Pastor Musakwa and the Ngaavongwe Crew were heaven sent. “I want to give thanks to Pastor Musakwa. That tour in Hwange was an eye opener. That is where my musical journey started.” Having formed a band, The Voice of Live Singers in 2002, Wa Chulwa has managed to produce music that continues to inspire the downtrodden. In 20017, the musician paid a musical tribute to the victims of a road traffic accident at the Kamativi gorges. The 2015 album, Elizina, was the highlight of a mature and we’ll horned artiste. “The album has eight tracks. I have done a lot of singles and unrecorded work too. I am forging ahead to my music playing.” From this album, the proud man from Binga mastered songs such as Nyika Ino, Soya Yansi, Leza Wangu, Huya Uone and Hossana. He said in his experience that spans over two decades, he felt more could be done to unearth musical talent in his province of Matabeleland North. “We need as many studios and support as musicians in Matabeleland North province. If we pull our talents together, the industry will rise,” said Wa Chulwa.