The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
ZIMBABWE all-rounder Wesley Madhevere insists the Chevrons are not “underdogs” ahead of their 1st One Day International against hosts Pakistan at the Pindi Cricket Stadium on Friday. The Chevrons will play Pakistan in three One Day Internationals and as many T20 Internationals between October 30 and November 10. The matches will be played in a secure bubble in line with the Covid-19 health and safety protocols. Addressing the media at a virtual press conference, Madhevere said the Chevrons had what it takes to compete against what appears to be a formidable Pakistan squad in both formats. “I do not believe that we are underdogs. This is just a game of cricket, from my point of view we have a strong squad, we have been competing over the past years and there is nothing that can stop us from doing that again in this series. “I have not focused much on the Pakistan side of things. l have been focusing on myself and the team to make sure that we do well as a team. l believe we have a strong chance to win games here which will help us with the world cup qualifiers and the super league. l think this is going to be an exciting series,” said Madhevere. The young all-rounder started the year on a high when he represented Zimbabwe at the ICC Under-19 World Cup hosted by South Africa between January and February. He struck two half centuries and got eight wickets at the youth World Cup before he was called to the senior side, which was touring Bangladesh in March. In Bangladesh, Madhevere scored a half century and captured two wickets. Although the Chevrons lost the three ODI and two T2O matches played in Bangladesh, Madhevere showed great promise. He will be hoping to build on that Bangladesh performance in this upcoming series. “I’m excited to be here in Pakistan for the first time. There are so many great things that l have heard about Pakistan, the history, the cricket here, so it is exciting for me to be here. I am just hoping that l do my best for the team and get some runs and wickets under my belt and get my name out there. I’m not sure if l will be part of the starting 11 as that is up to the coaches but l am excited to be here. “We have had good training sessions here. Normally, l try to look at the conditions for every ground, so l’m just trying to look at my game and see what l can work on and just try to perfect my game as much as possible. I’m also looking forward to the ODI’s l know l have played a couple of games for the country in the 50 Over format but l’m looking to improve my game there. “With the T20 matches l have not played that much but it is a great opportunity to get the chance to represent my country l hope to better my game in the T20 again “It’s quite amazing here, the people the players, the cricket and the places are amazing. Being here for the first time has motivated me as a player and its amazing to be here,” said Madhevere. Fixtures
30 Oct – 1st ODI, Pindi Cricket Stadium
1 Nov – 2nd ODI, Pindi Cricket Stadium
3 Nov – 3rd ODI Pindi Cricket Stadium
4 Nov – Travel to Lahore
5-6 Nov – Practice at Gaddafi Stadium
7 Nov – 1st T20I Gaddafi Stadium
8 Nov – 2nd T20I, Gaddafi Stadium
10 Nov – 3rd T20I, Gaddafi Stadium
— @innocentskizoe