The Chronicle THE recent rise in new Covid-19 cases needs to be nipped in the bud if the country is to finally move forward during what will probably go down in history as the most difficult year for mankind in the 21st century. Elangeni Training Centre in Bulawayo reopened yesterday to cater for the growing number of people testing positive for Covid-19 in the city, in what has been described by medical experts as a second wave of the global pandemic. Yesterday we reported that a Form Four pupil at a Bulawayo school tested positive for Covid-19 resulting in her contacts who include her classmates, being forced to self-isolate at home. The pupil is part of the exam classes that resumed lessons on September 28 to prepare for Zimbabwe School Examinations Council (Zimsec) examinations which are set to start on December 1. The case came as the seven-day average for new cases had risen to 19 from 14. Bulawayo Province has been recording a majority of the new cases and has the highest number of active cases countrywide. As of Monday, Bulawayo accounted for 1 570 cases of Covid-19 recorded since the outbreak of the disease in the country on March 20. The country has 238 active cases with the city having the highest number at 116 followed by Midlands province at 32. After the high school student’s Covid-19 positive results were confirmed, school authorities immediately followed the Primary and Secondary Education Ministry’s Standard Operation Procedures (SOP) guiding schools for safe reopening under the Covid-19 environment. Bulawayo acting provincial medical director Dr Welcome Mlilo said health officials were working with the school to ensure the situation is properly managed. “If a learner or member of the staff is sick, she/he should not come to school. Schools and independent colleges should enforce the policy of staying at home if unwell for learners, teachers, or school staff with symptoms. School health co-ordinators should avail contact details of the Ministry of Health and Child Care team allocated to each school for members to quickly access health services where necessary,” reads the SOP document. “The school officials should immediately notify public health authorities in cases of suspected contact by any learner, member of staff or visitors with any identified positive Covid-19 infected individual(s).” However, the SOP and other Government interventions, including enforcement of Covid-19 regulations by security agencies, can only work when citizens play their part. Wearing of masks, sanitising and social distancing can never be too much of a burden for responsible citizens. This is a small price to pay when compared to the damage the Covid-19 pandemic can cause to livelihoods and the economy. Students preparing for their final exams must be protected. They have already lost too much time and must map their future under very difficult circumstances. The students are moving between home and school, meaning if home is safe for every child, school is safe. Home can, however, only be safe if everyone in the family is responsible. Responsible authorities in Bulawayo must go back to the drawing board: why are the majority of new cases recorded in the city?
A comprehensive plan must be announced to instil confidence as well as encourage residents to play their part.
This is one war we can’t afford to lose.