The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Acting Sports Editor
SPORT authorities from every sector have been challenged to engage the global community in calling for the removal of illegal sanctions that have badly hurt the Zimbabwean economy including sport. Speaking ahead of the Sadc Anti-Sanctions Day on Sunday, the Zimbabwe Golf Association administrative assistant and former Sports and Recreation Commission communications officer Tirivashe Nheweyembwa, said it was high time that the sporting community stood up and be counted in publicly calling for the unconditional removal of the sanctions as the embargo has had a negative effect on the sport in the country. He said before the sanctions were imposed, there were partners such as UK Sport, Canadian Sport Development Programme working in Zimbabwe to support various programmes such as the Youth Education through Sport (YES) programme but all these were lost. There was also Volunteer Overseas Organisation (British Organisation) which used to deploy highly technical staff to work with local personnel as a way of skills transfer but again all that was lost upon the imposition of sanctions. “Athletes who had opportunities in countries that have imposed sanctions have been adversely affected. In the past it was easy to go on tour to these countries but now sport teams are subjected to stringent visa vetting procedures. What needs to happen is that the relevant authorities in sport should work closely with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade so that together they can push the re-engagement agenda. Sport authorities must use their International Relations skills to lobby for the removal of these illegal sanctions,” said Nheweyembwa. He said by its nature, sport is supposed to be used as a unifier especially in situations that the country is finding itself in. “The sport sector through the National Sport Associations should work towards having friendlies with the countries which have imposed sanctions on us and that way we can begin to make a positive impact. When we do that, it will not be long before we begin to notice countries changing their hardline position. It however, needs the sports people to actively take the initiative and complement politicians and Government officials’ re-engagement efforts,” said Nheweyembwa.