The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
BEITBRIDGE Municipality councillors yesterday elected Deputy Mayor, Councillor Munyaradzi Chitsunge to take over the position of mayor left vacant when Clr Morgan Ncube was recalled by the MDC-T a fortnight ago. Clr Agness Tore (Ward 6), who had initially been suspended with Ncube and finance committee chair Clr Granger Nyoni (Ward 5), was unanimously elected deputy mayor. She retained her seat (Ward 6) on technicalities after it was discovered that her names had been wrongly spelled in the recall letter from the MDC-T led by Dr Thokozani Khuphe. However, Clrs Ncube and Nyoni remain recalled. Beitbridge town has six administrative wards and those that had survived the axe include Clrs Chitsunge, Takavingei Mahachi (Ward 3) and Den Muleya (Ward 1). In his acceptance speech, Clr Chitsunge said he will continue from where Ncube had left and carry forward the vision of transforming the town into a medium city. “I am grateful to get such a huge mandate and will continue from where my predecessor left as we implement the Smart Cities concept. We have a number of projects that the council, the business and the residents should work on together, especially where infrastructure development is concerned,” he said. The mayor said the residents should also play their part by paying rates for the local authority to remain viable. He said the town has a lot of investment opportunities that await exploitation under the Special Economic Zone facility. Clr Chitsunge said businesses should put money on beef and related products, manufacturing, livestock production, retail, warehousing, packaging, accommodation, transport, and logistics among others. “Our vision is to turn the town into an industrial hub taking into account our location in Sadc within a strategic trade route. “But for us to get to the Promised Land, we need the council creating a conducive investment environment and the businesses seizing opportunities. When we were elected into office we removed political jackets. We want to work with all progressive minds,” said the mayor. The outgoing mayor said he was confident that the new leadership at the municipality will continue implementing people-centred service delivery. “The people should be the winners and we should move away from politics and focus on developing our town collectively. What has happened concerning my recalling is a story for another day, but that should not sway our focus in addressing pertinent developmental issues in our town,” he said. Beitbridge residents association chairman, Mr Thimothy Zendera said the council should urgently look at the road network, upgrade the water and sanitation facilities which are currently in a bad state.